RSU5 BOARD MEETING TRANSCRIPTS — ALL MEETINGS
Generated: 2026-03-19
Meetings included: 14
Total words: 409,197
Date range: September 10, 2025 to March 11, 2026
============================================================

RSU5 BOARD OF DIRECTORS MEETING TRANSCRIPT
Meeting Date: September 10, 2025
Source File: transcript_2025-09-10_B4uYUWf69jc.txt
District: Regional School Unit 5 (Freeport, Durham, Pownal, Maine)
============================================================

We will get what?

I I think you guys forget how 90% of our meetings go. This is it. Why is this mic on?

Good evening. Oh, is my coming through the sounds.

Perfect. Great. Thank you. Uh, good evening. Welcome to the RSU 5 board of directors meeting. It is Wednesday, September 10th, 2025. We are here in the Freeport High School Library. Uh just wanted to give a quick welcome to two board new board members since we finished last year. Valerie Williams and Chris Saviano. So uh we had our board retreat so they are well uh immersed into the group but for folks watching at home they are new members. So welcome.

Um Anna and Mora are both uh not with us this evening and Steph uh is running a little bit behind so she will be joining us shortly. Uh Phoebe is still our student rep uh until elections when she will, I'm sure, have a landslide uh victory again. But uh so welcome back, Phoebe. Welcome to senior year. And we will get started with the pledge of allegiance.

Do I have a motion for consideration and approval of the minutes from August 27th, 2025 as presented, barring any errors or omissions?

Kelly and Valerie. Thank you. All those in favor? Great. None opposed.

uh adjustments?

None. Great. All right. So, we will move right into good news and recognition and start with our report from Phoebe, our board student rep. So, I'm a senior now, so I'm just flying by the seat of my pants. Um, but week and a half into school, uh, people are so excited. Like, the energy in the hallways is awesome.

Um, we have our amazing upper classmen paired with their freshman and transfer mentees. Um, we've already done some really fun activities including on the Tuesday that school started where it was just freshman and their mentees, they were able to walk through all their classes, learn the ropes without all the scary sophomores there. Um, we also have club meetings all started this week. Um, we have at least one new club. Um, but I'm sure there'll be more like as the school year goes on. Um, lots of club recruiting is happening too, especially active minds.

And sports are starting. I think all teams have had their home openers except for football which is on Friday. Um, and oh, we had open house last night. um which families got to come and meet teachers and um get a little peek into the high school. So yeah, not too much to report, but things are going well and it's been good week and a half.

Thank you. All right. Um public comment.

This is where we look at the empty audience in case someone comes flying around the corner.

All right, we will carry on. Uh, item eight, report from the superintendent.

Good evening, everybody. Is this picking my voice up? Okay, my first one of these.

Um, so I'd like to just share some updates with you since the start of school. Um, I'll talk a bit about the strategic plan, um, about how we're thinking about going forward with the budget process this year. Um there's some enrollment data to look at and talking about some longer range planning on some critical issues. So um several board members were um able to attend the staff opening day, the PLLD day. Um we took pains this year to make sure that event was really inclusive. We know that we have a number of staff for whom English is not the first language. And I really need to point out that Erica back there really worked hard to make sure that we had translation available for those SER folks so that they could feel and be fully included. I think that was really important. Um it was a great day.

The the district here does a fantastic job making that meaningful. Not every district that I have worked in actually has the entire district come together in person to open the school year. and everything that happened in the cafeteria, everything that happened in the auditorium, the longevity awards, I it was a I thought it said a really good note. It was a privilege to be there and I spoke I shared a little bit about myself and my journey and my values and um I have been making it a priority as school has started to be as visible in the schools as I can be. Um I put some of those in my weekly update to you and I don't need to rehash them all, but I'm going to continue to do that. Serving lunch at the high school was particularly cool. I don't know if I served you lunch, but I served lots of people lunch. Was fun.

It was the the sticks and marinos sticks.

Yeah, I definitely like And honestly, I think they knew that it was me and they're like, they should make we should make it easy for this guy. Two sticks. It was fun.

Um, the whole team has really administrative team has worked hard to make school open. And I don't know if you noticed, but I noticed school opened pretty darn seamlessly across the whole district. Um, some people who really deserve shoutouts. Sam Rigby had a huge lift this summer with lots of tech updates and most of those have come to fruition. Some of them will have to be spaced out as the school year goes along during times when kids are not in school, but um Sam's really worked hard and his team have done a great job.

Glenn Reynolds and the facilities crew and the custodial crew have had a ton of updates across the district and those have been in place so that school could open efficiently. Really, really good work there. Um, I didn't get a single call about bus problems when school opened, which is a huge thing. Thank you, Jeremy.

Jeremy did a fantastic job. And this seems like an opportune time to point out that he is, even though we had anticipated, I say we, but I wasn't here yet. there. The district had anticipated that we would need more drivers and more vehicles and got an extra van and replaced an old van. We've still had to push a van that has 200,000 miles back into service and we are using every driver we have and we are fully maxed out and Jeremy has made that work seamlessly. So, a lot of credit to Jeremy. Um, so again I could go on and on but it's been an auspicious start to the year and you should know that a little bit about the strategic plan. So we have obviously you know that work began on that last winter and spring. We are continuing to work on that now. And in fact, just today I participated in one of the focus groups at the middle school where we had kids in small groups and they were asked a series of questions that were largely about what are your hopes and aspirations for this district. What do we do well? What do we need to improve? And not surprisingly, kids are really candid. And so we got a lot of good feedback from those uh that those conversations that we will carry forward in figuring out the plan. I also want to point out that this is for the whole community. We have focus groups scheduled for the end of this month that are really important. Um the dates and times of these are on our website, but I'll announce them here now, too. On Monday, Monday, September 22nd at 6 o'clock, we have a focus group at Powell Elementary School.

Thursday the 25th at 6th at Durham, Saturday, September 27th at 10:00 a.m.

at the Freeport Community Library, and Tuesday, September 30th at 6:00 here at the high school. So, those are opportunities for any community member to join in a conversation about what our district should look like and how it should continue to grow.

And you don't have to attend the one like where your kids go, right? So, if a Saturday one works better for you, you're welcome to come to any of the Right. Yes, absolutely. And those are not the only opportunities to weigh in, but those are important ones. There will be other there will be surveys, there will be other community input events.

So, please engage in the process because these are your schools and it's their future. Um, we have also we've tried to push the word out for this as much as we can. We have a newsletter. We've done a media push. We've done that through the towns. We've done that through the schools. We've done that through social media. We've had a banner put up on our website that like literally every page on the website you click through this banner comes up. So there are no excuses for missing these dates. Um again the strategic planning process itself whatever whatever plan we come up with the process is really important. So I would ask people to engage in it.

So budget um one of the priorities that I remembered and took to heart from the board retreat was that the voice of the staff is very important to the board and rightly so in identifying priorities for the budget. So, I've been thinking about that and talking with our team about how to develop some procedures that give the staff meaningful opportunities to weigh in on what the priorities that should frame the budget from their point of view should be. So, one of the things that I feel I need to emphasize as I talk about this is that we are actually not starting from scratch with this because our administrators and directors already do have and have had mechanisms to get input from their staff. Um, and one of the steps that I've asked those folks to do to start us off is to codify those for me. In other words, to write down, okay, how is it that you what is your standing practice of getting your staff's input and then we'll take a look at that and see where we might be able to do better, but we'll also be able to inform the board about what those practices are. We're also planning to add a few other steps. So later this month we're going to be scheduling voluntary listening sessions at each school where the staff from the school can this would be after school not included in regular staff meeting time.

um the staff can come to provide their perspective about budget priorities and I've framed a series of questions four questions that are very broad that would frame those conversations and the questions are in a nutshell what strengths do we need to maintain what challenges do we face where should we grow and where could we find efficiency and the staff will have an opportunity to weigh in on that and then we will also have a survey. Um part of that however is that we need to acquaint everyone from the board to the community to the staff about the pressures we face with the budget and we talked a little bit about that at our board retreat. So I have a little information to share now about that and more will be coming but it's important for us all to know that this year the budget is appro the overall district budget is approximately $44.5 million and the by far the largest part of the budget is wages and benefits. They're more well more than half the budget. That's true in every school district. That's just the nature of education. So, our negotiated contracts for wages and benefits that we already have are going to go up by 8.6% next year. And because wages and benefits are by far the biggest part of the budget, that means when wages and benefits go up 8.6%. The overall budget goes up 7.1%.

That's without figuring anything else in. And some of the other things that we will likely have to think about are we have not yet negotiated a contract for our support staff.

Everybody out there's talking about anticipating that health care costs, health insurance costs are going to go up again. Um the price of everything going up again. And given what we went through earlier this year with federal funding, which thankfully all came out fine in the wash, we don't know what's going to happen with that this year.

So there are unknowns.

So that's just I think an important piece for everyone to know going into it. Those are factors that we know about that should not stop us from being aspirational. It shouldn't stop us from thinking about new things that we might want to do, but it's a big part of the puzzle. So um I'll pause for a minute if anybody would like to ask a quick question about that.

hearing none. So again, the intent here is to make sure that there's transparency in this process and we're all working with common information and then everyone's voice can be heard in a meaningful way.

Um, another part of that puzzle that I forgot to mention, but I should, is where when I say the overall budget would go up 7.1%, where does that fit in historically? So if we were to go back 10 years in time and look at how the budget has increased over time, what we find is an inverted bell curve. And if I go back to before COVID, let's say the mid20s, budget increases were going down. In other words, the percentage that the budget went up each year was going down each year. Then we got to COVID and it bottomed out because we had a bunch of federal grant money, COVID relief money that was temporary that came along and then over a few years got spent and that happened to coincide as we all know who have lived in this country with inflation. So the co money was going away, inflation was going up and budgets in schools, not just here but everywhere started to increase again and the rate of the increase started to accelerate.

So to put that in perspective, last year and the year before were the two biggest years of budget increase. So last year it was a 6.48% increase. The year before that it was a 6.83% increase. And of course, how much of that you felt as an individual individual taxpayer depended upon which town you were in and how that computed to your individual town's share of the budget.

So we are already looking at the moment at a 7.1% increase without all the factors being weighed.

So another factor that we consider in this is the enrollment. And basically, um, one of the things that I've uncovered that this district experienced in recent memory was an influx of, um, was a spike in enrollment, but that spike then went down. Um, that was largely due, as I understand it, to an influx of new mayors who moved into the community, but many of those folks, not all, but many have moved out. So if we keep that in mind, the enrollment has basically been flat with very minor fluctuations. And the best guess we have right now is it's going to continue to be flat for the next handful of years like, you know, a fraction of a percentage point off here and there.

So um enrollment also determines state funding and it determines how much how big our classes are. It it drives a lot of decisions. So these are some factors that we will be considering as we look at the budget.

Um so there's a lot going on as I transition into this role. Um these are some of the new things I want to emphasize again the strategic planning process is very important to the district and I hope people buy in. And I'll stop there.

Any questions on what we've heard so far?

Kelly, I just wanted to thank you for being forthright about all this early on so that we have a lot of time to think about it ahead of time. I know this is going to be probably one of our biggest challenges this year. And so I I just appreciate you being very honest and open about it.

All right. Um, yeah, I feel like once I have some time to digest some of these uh uh enrollment numbers, I might have some questions specifically around like prek, what's happening there, because that's an interesting that seems to be the biggest shift from what we thought to what we got. And I know that's always a hard guess.

That's the hardest one to guess because we don't know them yet, right? They haven't been here yet. Um, but that's um interesting. Yeah.

The good news is you mentioned prek.

So the good news is that our enrollment for prek is is solid in that we have decent class sizes. I mean at Mass Landing we have an average class size of 13.75. At Pound it's 8. At Durham it's 11.7.

The maximum class size for a prek classroom is 16. And that's a teacher and an edtech.

It's and you have to have two adults in there. You have to have one adult per eight students. So, we're doing fine in terms of enrollment with prek.

Great. Okay. Thank you.

All right. Uh do you want to go through the resignations and hires? Sure. I know that was in our packets.

It is.

So, I don't know if it's been past practice to read out all the names. Um, but you have in your packet on a green piece of paper a list of summer staff hires. And for those who are new, it's the practice in this district that when over the summer months when the board is not meeting that the superintendent is empowered to do hires without the board.

Um, so for most of the summer that was Jean Scarappa and since August 18th that's been me. So, you have a list here of the people that have been hired over the summer and a list of resignations.

And maybe this isn't fair to to throw at you, and I know Kelly's not here, who usually keeps the running list, but uh in terms of openings, how are we feeling about do we have a are we pretty well staffed for our openings? Are there still spots?

There are there are some still some spots, but all things considered, we're not we're pretty good. Um, the hardest area we've been having is edte. Um, and you know, we have several positions and and don't ask me to get too specific about it without digging into my laptop, but you know, we have several positions for which like there are postings for one or two edte in a school, but we actually have maybe three vacancies and it's not worth posting the third one because we have two postings out there that, you know, we don't have any candidates for. Um, but we continue to search for people.

Thank you.

All right. So, we do not have any uh we're easing everybody back into our regular board meetings here. We don't have any administrator reports. We don't have any board reports or committee reports because most committees haven't met yet. We don't have a policy review yet. Um, so we will move on to unfinished business. Um and the first thing we are going to undertake is the work plan. Uh this was originally on our retreat uh agenda but as uh usual we sometimes struggle to get to that item because we spend lots of time talking about um other things in that in that retreat. So in an effort to give it the um the time it deserves, I will tell you I think Jenny originally had this on the agenda for 10 minutes. I laughed at her.

Um I was like, "Do you know us? What are you talking about? So, um yeah, so in your packets is um the draft work plan.

Um and what this includes so far is um kind of the standing items um that we that we talk about every year. So, you know, we try to get uh an update from each of the school administrators and each of the um each of the directors uh around their goals for the year. Um usually the the school administrators will tell us like how their beginning of school has gone, those types of things.

Those are all in here. Um we do have a few other items um already kind of plugged in in terms of the of the work plan. Um, as we mentioned, the cell phone usage is on there for the next meeting in September. Um, I also noticed the multilingual learner update is in here in October. Um, there was some discussions um, I think Erica had mentioned something about um, uh, providing a a presentation to the board.

Now I'm trying to remember exactly what it was relative to. I believe it was a a curriculum as does anybody remember from the retreat? It was a great idea.

Chapter 104 which is gate. Oh, I was like what? Okay. So, uh yeah.

So, the practices in the in the um in the district around around our gate programming obviously the strategic plan uh is in here in a variety of places as well as the budget process so far.

Um so you know one of the things that we try to do is um provide information to the board around um you know things that are happening in within the district that we might not see at a surface level um you know some more detailed information. We have had um presentations about uh social emotional supports that are in the schools. You know, talking about the social workers, the the counselors, the all of you know, what do we have that's available? What are you know, what are kids accessing?

Those types of things. Um we've had program, we've had presentations on um pretty much anything you can think of.

Um, and we want to make sure that the board feels informed about what's happening in the district, all the great work that's happening. Um, these these presentations also can provide an opportunity to highlight maybe something that we'd like to be doing better and to give the board sort of that initial look to say like, hey, this is what we're doing now. Um, this is some gaps we're seeing. So just be prepared when we come back usually around budget time uh with how we're going to propose filling those gaps or things like that. Um I think maybe the other thing we had talked about was um the review of of um was it around sort of consistency of of programming across the different towns and districts and schools and not districts but um towns and schools to um to make sure that we're looking at sort of the the equity piece. We talked about that a lot during the budget process. Um I feel like maybe that was something that Erica had mentioned. Um what did you say? MTSS.

Yes, MTSS. Right. So multi-tered uh systems of supports. Um the replacement for RTI for folks at home who may have just figured out what RTI means. Now we're moving on to MTSS. So um it's always a new Yes. Yes. Um, one other thing that we should I would strongly recommend we consider in the work plan probably early is that we need to um talk about the requirement from CDS that school districts assume um responsibility for providing FAPE free and appropriate public education to preschool age children.

Right. So, right. So, that I don't think is picked up anywhere yet in here.

Right. Um, but that is one that I think one it's new um and it's not it's not effective yet but it's coming pretty quickly we have to plan for right so um but it is something that I think we will see in in budget cycles in the you know if not this year soon after that um so understanding what does that mean what is it what are the implications what are I mean not that we have to have it all figured out and solved yet because I think that might be a bit of a a um herculean task at this point without more information but at least to get get it on everybody's radar um so that we're ready for those conversations when they when they do require us to take action. Um okay. So, so CDS Mhm.

Um I think I think this draft work plan has most of the requests for for presentations that we have heard over the last year, but maybe not. Okay, which what was another one? Um, what about student leadership? I think we've talked about that in the past. I mean, Phoebe's a good person to ask that, but I enjoyed their presentation. And she's leaving. She's leaving. Bye-bye, Phoebe. Um, I I think it's good to hear from the students. And I think that would be great if the, you know, we get the high schoolers to definitely do it. Maybe once, maybe twice would be nice, I think. But how about some of the other schools, too? Does, you know, can the middle school kids present something? Do they have that ability?

I'm trying to think if they have any kind of groups that I mean they don't even well I guess I don't know this for the middle school but I don't believe Durham does even like student council student council I don't do they at FMS I don't think so I I know that Mass Landing definitely does so that could be an option at least for that school I don't know that FMS does not does not okay and yeah and I don't think Durham does either Um, for the middle school component, um, I definitely think, you know, some sort of involvement or presentation from that leadership team here at the high school is a great idea. I'm going to say that I think we're going to definitely be pulling them into the the cell phone usage um, debacle. I don't know, is that the right word? Let's be optimistic. Rich discussion.

That was optimistic. I was going to say that was the best word I could come up with. Thank you.

Um because I think you know one thing um I forget I think it was actually the the the group uh in the community for the responsible use for techn I forget their full name but um the folks that reach out to us about the use of technologies in our schools those types of things.

Uh, one of the things they provided us um had some great links to how other districts kind of their process and learnings and um what went well, what didn't. Um, and it does seem like the the inclusion of the um of the student body particularly at the high school level um is key to successful implementation regardless of which way you go. Um, so I think I hope that our process will include that um as a as a part a key part of the of the process. So yes, on that note, I was wondering if it would make sense to have the cell phone usage discussion be the following meeting when the middle school and the high school are here to give updates and goal reviews.

That's not a bad idea since they'll already be here. Yeah, it might that might be a good place if we move cell phones to talk about CDS, right? While we have more street. Yeah.

Yep.

Is that provide enough time to put together a pre because that's the other thing I I'm trying to be respectful of is the time it takes to put together these presentations. you know, we we sit and listen for 20 minutes or so and ask questions for, you know, another 20 minutes or so, but I know that a ton of work goes into the background to prepare those presentations. So, um, does does that provide enough time? I mean, not that it has to be the most in-depth presentation we've ever seen, but is that enough to get us It is. Okay. Yeah.

All right. So, we think CDS here on the 24th and then Yeah, the cell phone. I I guess I just want to I would advocate for um having kind of a having a designated uh presentation for the student leadership that isn't connected to cell phone usage like yeah that would that'll be great to have them involved on that.

But I would rather have it give them an opportunity to say all right like in terms of student leadership what do you want to what do you want to talk about?

What do we need to know? What does the district need to know? um rather than just have it. No, I 100% agree with that. Yeah, because I know that I mean in prior years they've had sort of like groups within the group that have focused on a variety of different things. I don't know what those things maybe you guys don't know what those things are yet this year. Um I off the top of my head I feel that like the December first meeting in the only meeting in December.

I was say there's only one in December.

Yeah. Um that might be a a good fit a good spot there. And does that give the I'm looking at Phoebe because she's on this group. Um does that give you guys enough time to one figure out your your goals and plans for the year and two come up with something you could present to us?

Yeah. So I I don't want to speak for my whole team here but um I will um yeah December wait December 10th I think would be a good time. So, our typical trajectory is um in the December time we are kind of in the middle of our conversation recordings. Um so, we're like really like hosting um all these different conversations about whatever we choose. We don't have that topic yet. Our first meeting is tomorrow. Um, so we can give you like a midyear update during that time.

I think in the spring we could give like a whole year update, but we are our work is usually cutting pretty close to the last day of school. Um, when do you have a spirit week or anything like that? We do homecoming. Yeah. First week of this October.

Yes. And I think we do one. No. Oh yeah, that's it.

I think there might be one in the spring.

Yeah, maybe depending on if we do a spring dance. That isn't prom. Um, is homecoming really Friday this year?

Yes. Um, so yeah, but I honestly think our team like can put together whatever we can at the time. if you pencil us in, I think it actually might be helpful to like have something we're like working towards and like we have to get to this spot by this time. So, wherever you feel like you can put us, I think it has in the past been very valuable for the team to um come here and present because we feel like, you know, we're being listened to. It helps us get our work out to like the broader community. Um, so if you are willing to have us, I think um the team would be very excited to present. So maybe um May 6th. So that's after we've adopted the budget. So all of the budget sort of deliberations are done. Um we have our Q&A, but then um there there's not a a a huge agenda of items on the sixth. Does that work? Because that's that's kind of you don't want to do it at the annual budget meeting. And then the last two tend to get a little busier at the very end. So what's that? Is it? Yes, it is. It is around AP exam time, but in the past it's kind of been like yes, we will be um prepping during our meetings for this presentation, but in terms of like the actual presentation, I feel like it's been like less than 20 minutes before um I feel confident that they will like prioritize it. Um okay. Yeah, I Why don't we put it in and then, you know, if you guys are getting to that point when everyone's hair is on fire and you're like, "We can't do this," then let's talk about it.

Okay. Yeah. Thank you. Um, they're going to be really happy to hear.

Okay. So, December 10th and May 6th and you will share that with your team.

Oh, wait. Both. So, the December 10th is home or No, December 10th. That was like sort of your midyear one or you're saying that you prefer to just do it in May. You think? Maybe.

Why don't you go talk to them tomorrow and see how they're feeling and let us know? Perfect. We would love to hear from you twice, but we know you guys have very full plates. So, okay.

This is I think more of a question, but I'm just I just I'm just thinking about the work plan and thinking about past years and kind of how the I guess kind of the arc of kind of like what we work on or what we learn about. And I guess I'm I'm wondering especially this year where we um we don't have a um we're sort of out of strategic plan like we don't we're not there's nothing we're executing in terms of a strategic plan that we established you know we that we finished that cycle. So we're a little limboy um on that but yet we're moving toward or we're we're in the process of developing um the next strategic plan. I guess I'm just wondering um I guess kind of like what the goal reviews will really be at a kind of macro level like kind of what they're going to be about. Um because I would think in a in a I'm sort of thinking back in a in a in uh in a year where we we we're in the midst of a strategic plan. I think there'd be some sense that the the goals are like how are we doing toward that or kind of like um and I guess so I guess that's just sort of a general question and I guess the other question is just is there a way that we could make use of those without giving um extra labor to the um admin staff to use those sort of as part of the strategic planning process for the board. In other words, sort of a way of kind of understanding like these are the things we're thinking about. Like these are the things we're we're currently like here's a snapshot of what we're working on and these are the things that are important to us. We're not quite sure where this is going to go, but this I don't know if um either those things make sense. The way that kind of sits with me at the moment is that as we're shaping the new plan and we're detached from the outcome and we don't know what that will be yet, I I do think we're in this limbo area where the the building's goals that come forward are somewhat free floating. Um but my hope and expectation would be that next year once we have the plan that building goals would have a clear link to the overall strategic plan and I say that they're free floating. I would be highly surprised if the goals that come forward from the schools are just completely out in left field. I've seen the high school's goals. They are all their own strategic plan. They they do which came out of a which is an interesting configuration but Jen explained how that came about to me the other day. Um and you know they're going after good things that we would all agree are make sense.

Um I haven't heard from the other principles yet about their specific goals but I will be over the course of the next month or two. So I I think you know my recommendation at the moment would be to as as the principles come forward and share their school goals to ask good questions about how they may have aligned with the strategic plan in the past and you know they will know that in the future we have to make explicit connections and I I mean I don't I guess to your point of being detached from the outcome I would be surprised um if our next strategic plan was completely divergent from the one we've been working on working through for the past several years. I imagine it's an extension and an expansion of that. So one would hope.

Yes, we're going completely in a different direction. Um I just pulled up um the email that Anna had sent and then also Kelly had sent some uh some additional ones around ideas. Some of these I think we have captured um the CDS kind of prek piece um the um I think Kelly mentioned um major curriculum changes from the equity lens. I think that's a good one. I think I think that's what I was recollecting from from our from our retreat. Um, so I don't I don't know where um where folks are feeling about that one, if that's one that we want to um to find a place for.

Um, and then the other two that jumped out at me um is sort of the AI technology piece.

Um, as well as PD. That was the other um the other item that popped up in in some of those emails. So, um, yeah, and I was wondering if some of these could be captured within the building goal reviews, for example, when our building administrators come up, they can talk about what kind of PD they're they're doing inside their building, so we don't necessarily need a separate, right? Yeah. Session, right? That's a Yeah. way to capture kind of because I I know in the past some um you know we had for example we had a year where um every every goal update we got from a build administrator we didn't have a specific presentation for all the districts but each one we said what is your everyone was dealing with attendance in some form or fashion so how were how are they how were they dealing with that what was their approach um so maybe something similar to that same with um DEI, right? We were like, what what are each of the schools, regardless of the grade span of the school doing uh within their schools around that student voice is another one. We said, hey, sort of a prompt that we gave every administrator when they presented their goals um was make sure you key in on that. So maybe PD could be kind of the prompt we look for from them this year. How does that feel to people? That sound works for you?

Absolutely. Okay. Um, so I think we have CD CDS baked in. We have cell phones. Uh, I imagine cell phones is probably going to be more than one meeting, but we'll build it in there first.

Yeah. I guess just just on that, maybe if we just linger for a second to say like what we like what we mean when we talk about cell phone, like when we put that on the work plan, like what do we mean by that? like are we saying um at that meeting which we moved it up right or back where did we move October 8th yeah October 8th right um I mean that seems sort of early enough to kind of I don't know be kind of like um laying out a plan like talking about whether a plan is needed because I think I just I I want to just make sure we kind of continue on from our conversation last spring where one of the things that we kind of came to was um um with the understanding that yes, it's very important to have engagement from all of the different stakeholders. Um there's at least some opinion on the board that there's not a whole lot new to be learned um about what the options are. Um so I guess I just want to make sure when we're saying like this is part of the work plan, like what does that mean? And I know that the um we're required uh to by the state to have a a policy about cell phones. So that's slated in. Um I think you could say that's maybe the genesis.

Yeah. I mean that's kind of to put this on. We have to have a policy by July 1st, right? And that I mean I think we can start working on that as a we can start working on that I guess slightly agnostically in terms of saying well this if we had to write a plan about what you know this is what we or what's our policy currently we can articulate that and put that on paper. Um but yeah I guess like what do we mean when we say we're going to talk about cell phones in October.

Yeah I mean I think uh our was it our last meeting? No it was our I think our second to last meeting um in June. I went back and rewatched that meeting. Um to refresh my memory on our conversation there, uh I think there was a couple things. There was uh there was some folks that were going to do some work around finding out costs of of options if we chose to go Yep.

or alternatives alternatives to those. Um just so we know what those look like.

Um I think uh Anna's point in her email was a good one. Um, I don't think we had full feedback from the staff around their their preference um of of next steps. I think that's key. Um, you know, maybe Phoebe can throw something else on their agenda tomorrow for the student leadership team to to start you guys brainstorming around, you know, collecting feedback or or thoughts or, you know, procedurally how we might go move forward. Um, yeah. like are you wanting us to like go forward with like hosting conversations or like provide like the kind of templates we go by that like students know already or Yeah, I mean I I think I think maybe uh you guys can just start be pre preparing for the fact that we're probably going to be tapping you to to solicit um whether it's feedback from the students or whether it's your um you know your thoughts on the best way for us to share information with the students about a change like this. Um you know kind of kind of a I would envision a two-way conversation there right? Um I think I think we have a pretty to Colin's point I think we have a pretty good uh idea of what the general feedback is going to be when we say hey what do you think? Um but maybe you know some thoughts around you know what what might a communication program look like to to you know share the wise the you know I think that was the other piece we talked about in June was it sounded like there was some potentially some really good speakers that might be good to start the process with around like why is this important right um so I I would love to hear more about that on October 8th right is that feasible is it you know 50 grand to get the person here and that's not, you know, yeah, it it seems to me just having I I mean I I wasn't here for the previous parts of this conversation, but it seems to me that October 8th, you probably want to decide as a board whether you're still in listening mode or whether you're in talking mode. Are you at the point where you're still seeking information to inform how you feel or have you had have do you have enough? And I think I heard Colin say at a certain point, you've learned a lot already. Don't know how much more there is to learn. And I think that that one question, are you still listening or are you talking will help you decide what you want to do on that day.

So I did not watch this previous conversation, so I'm coming in fully blind. Um, the date of that meeting with the link so folks that didn't see that would be wonderful. Um, and the time hacks, you don't have to watch the whole thing.

That said, do we have a way to reach out to districts who have already implemented solutions to see how that's going for them?

Yeah. I mean, you know, we know who they are, so it could and and I think there's been some sharing of information.

Yeah. Yeah, I mean I would just say on that that um I mean part I think part of the impetus for even having this conversation is be is that uh the vice principal at the high school was like we talked to Bath and it's working really well not having cell phones in the high school. Um and so I think we I think that is a that is I would say that's a large data point. Um that's not the only one that we could we could look at or should look at. Um, but I think it's just important to acknowledge that I think that is that was one of the precipitating um uh uh pieces of information and I wonder if they have a counterpart to our leadership group that our leaders might just to get because I would imagine that the teachers and the administration are happy with that. But we also want to make sure that we are and and not to say that it would necessarily say, "Oh geez, the kids are, you know, unhappy that they can't use their phones during the day." So we we should just scrap the whole idea. It we do have to make a decision at some point, but it might help help us understand like is there a better way to implement it? Is there a better way to message it? Um or is it just a you know prepare?

Yeah. I I don't know if Phoe's hands up or she's Yeah. And then I'll go to Steph.

Um, I would say, um, like to Superintendent Gray's question of like, listen, are we done listening? I would feel pretty strongly that I think there's still some more information to be gotten. Um, not necessarily about like our phones bad. I think we're feeling pretty like solidly there. Um, but in terms of like the hows and the who's and the wins. Um, I think getting student feedback is going to help. Even if you don't even take any of it, showing students in any situation, like showing students you're listening and you want to know, I think it's going to help with the buy in. Um, but I wouldn't like discount like what the high school and even the middle school students would have to say because I from the conversations I hear in class and in the hallways and in the lunchroom like people have a lot of different opinions.

Um, and I don't think they're all like like a punk like high school kid. Like I do think that people like we know but I think you could get a lot of good information. And then I also think um that communication with other schools and maybe getting some like actual like other than just hearing like PATH is doing great. Um hearing some like either some like real data points or like um testimony from teachers cuz we know that is like the a big thing is we don't really in terms of like the bags like teachers don't want to be like having to enforce other policies. So, like hearing from teachers at in districts who have had other policies that don't require as much like teacher enforcement, hearing from them, maybe hearing from some students. Um, yeah, I think there is some some still some more information to be gotten.

Yeah, and I think that that's a great point. Thank you, Phoebe. Um, you know, just like what are the concerns around it, right? and maybe there's ways to meet those needs. Um, but if we don't even know that it's a concern or a need, then how do we address it? So, thanks for that. Seth, I attended the MSBA um regional meeting last night and two um representatives from other districts, Raymond Windham and York, just implemented policies as well. And there was talk that MSBA is going to put together like draft sample policies of like varying kinds and they'll be made available. So I think that that could be another resource to consider. Um and some of those folks from those schools were willing to share what they've done and information. So it seems that like there's dialogue that's starting to be shared amongst districts as well. That might be helpful.

Yeah, those MSBA regional meetings might be a really good because the um I don't know if you found it to be helpful, but I have in the past. I I wasn't able to join last night, but um people I mean they're just other board members. Um and people are really happy to share, you know, what's working for them, what's not working for them. Um and York and uh Windham Raymond were those full bell-to-bell bands.

Bel bands for both of them. Interesting.

Yeah. That they started when school started this fall. So they they both, you know, schoolboard members, not students. um they both reported that it was reported as successful in the you know two weeks that we've been back but um yeah so car yeah I agree that we're still in listening mode for a bit and would love to hear more from students here and from students in other schools and from um the teachers in the other schools as well. So, that's information that I would like to continue to receive and that if there's a way that we could make that happen on the 8th, I think that would be helpful.

Um, I know that's um the policy committee will be looking at our work plan on tomorrow and I don't recall where the cell phone piece falls on that if or if it's there yet, but yeah. and and so that committee will be looking at a variety of policies in that process, but I think it's would be really helpful to hear how those policies are being implemented and how it's working.

Yeah. And um not that I want to make him come to another meeting, but it might be helpful to have Will also what for that conversation if our plan is to have Pam and Jen from the high school and FMS. Um because I do think it's important that you know obviously there's a variety of schools this impacts. Not so much the the younger younger grades although maybe it does I don't know but um certainly the middle schools and the high school.

Yeah. No, I was just thinking in terms of the actual work plan if it would make sense since it sounds like we do have a lot of information we could still yet gather if we used that October 8th meeting as sort of the the listening piece and then we schedule another session somewhere later in our work plan for the for Yeah. the talking piece or preparing for the talking piece.

Yeah. As we think about policies and procedures. Yeah.

Yeah. And I think I mean I want to I want to thank you Phoebe for for articulating the importance of that and and I think I uh I I stand kind of I want to say sort of morally corrected on the sort of importance of the importance of that and I didn't mean to suggest that um there's we don't need to hear more voices. We do I think so I think we are still in listening mode. I think probably what I what I'm realizing I meant was that I think the board knows why we are talking about it like that we kind of know that what we are concerned about is um the the social and emotional well-being of of our students and um the quality of the education the educational experience that they are receiving. So I think that um again I'm perhaps I'm assuming too much um but I think that I think that is I think that is where at least I'm coming from. So I think that um if that's true I think that that maybe is an important thing for us to talk about at that October 8th. It's sort of like well why are we even having this conversation and sort of being able to say to the community but also to be able to say to the students this these are our concerns and this is why we are considering a bell-to-bell ban right and sort of it's not because like um how did you put it Phoebe that cell phones are bad um like yeah they are but like that's not that's not the reason like that's not the reason we're we're we're doing it um or that's not the reason we're exploring it we're exploring it because we care about these particular um the impact acts of them on the students in a in a couple ways. So again, I don't know who is the appropriate person to articulate that or kind of to like share that. I don't know if that's I don't know if that's you, Superintendent Gray. I don't know if that's one of the guest, you know, the possible guest speakers that we spoke about. Um, but I don't know. I think that should be something that is that is voiced by someone who can can really speak to the uh importance of that and why we're even talking about it.

I think it's probably me with input from the team. Okay, baby. Sorry, I know it's kind of dragging this one point out, but um I kind of I got us 45 minutes on the agenda. We can use it.

Um I kind of have an idea for the whole um cell phone like conversation.

Um, I think maybe I could be a liaison to the high school at least. And I'm curious if I were to organize a group of high school students. Um, maybe they could, you know, just keep it in their mind, start thinking about it. Um, maybe meet together, have a informal conversation, and then come to the October 8th meeting. Maybe they'll share at public comment to start or maybe they'll listen to y'all's conversation, choose to share. Maybe at the end, maybe not. Just like a group, like a kind of focused group of students. Um, you know, it could be the student leadership team.

But I think um in from what I've seen with the polarization of this topic, especially with high schoolers, um I think I would be able to find a lot of different types of students who'd be willing to um help with this work and like have a say in it. Um, so I'm curious if that's something people would be interested in like just getting a group of high school students like starting to think and maybe it could form up a little more later on once we start talking more formally about it.

I love that idea. Phoebe, good thing I accidentally got a Canva premium account so I can make some posters accidentally. I'm gonna I might hit you up because I I need to get better at Canva. So, well, I have it till next month. So, so bearing in mind Kelly's comment, might I suggest for the November 5th meeting we put in the followup? Yeah.

Um I wouldn't want to let it linger too linger too long.

And um the other thing I was thinking about and maybe this is just sort of a a standing thing that we can put, you know, maybe it doesn't need to be on the work plan, but um the the strategic plan doesn't pop into here until June 3rd, right?

Um, I think we probably maybe want some kind of intervening updates. Sure.

So, I I don't know if it needs to be in here or it can be just sort of we could certainly put it in here. I can also promise you it will be in my updates to you and a number of folks are participating in that.

Yeah. and and um which I think is is super great and valuable and I appreciate everybody who's spending their time doing that. But I also think it's important for community members to kind of hear that update and they don't I mean while they could look at those the weekly updates we get um I think we get surprisingly get a lot of people that watch these meetings. Don't be fooled by the empty seats.

They're watching from home on the couch with popcorn.

Did he mean his updates in the beginning of the meeting?

Well, I meant I will my weekly updates to you, but also my superintendence reports.

Yeah. So, maybe we just sort of make it a, you know, like a standing item once a month on the superintendence update just for where we are with the strategic plan and absolutely can do. Yeah. Great.

Anything else that's jumping out at folks? I I would like to visit um AI conversation at least once and and to Colin's point of about the cell phone item on the agenda, what would that look like? Would we be having would we be in learning mode or would we be in talking mode?

What would that look like? We might need to have that on here more than once.

Yeah. I mean, I don't know about everybody else on the board, but I would certainly be still in learning mode. I don't feel like I know nearly enough to to weigh in on on where I think we need to go with that. Um yeah, maybe that's a good one for uh for Sam.

Oh, for sure. Yeah.

Um you know, I don't want him to feel neglected on the work plan here at all. Absolutely not.

Um so February 25th is a budget review. Technology is part of that.

December 10th.

December 10th. Yep. Michelle, I almost feel like that's a curriculum issue, too. Um, so maybe that would be one that he might want to share with our assistant superintendent. Yeah. Yeah. How they come together.

He's also on December 10th. Yes.

Yeah. Yeah, I was I was going to say I was going to say the same thing, Kelly, that I think that that's I think I think again I think what I'm primarily interested in on that is understanding um how is AI impacting the schools currently like how what are the different schools um how are they addressing how are they addressing it? How are they making use how are they using it? I think that would be um helpful to know just kind of like a state of the state of the state and then a little bit of a sense from again from a curricular perspective and maybe a little bit more broadly beyond or maybe well beyond the district of sort of like how are people talking about this like I mean I have read my own collection of of things about um AI and education but to really understand from a um from within the school um what kind of things are are are we are we thinking about and should we be aware of so that um uh when it pops up on the strategic plan which it will do uh detach from the outcome detached from yeah we know I don't know the answer uh but like that when it pops up we sort of have some context for sort of like where where is that coming where's that coming from and what are we trying to achieve with it and you know that sort of thing.

Yep. Um, so, so on December 10th, I could ask Erica and Sam to collaborate on presentation around AI.

Yeah. And then the only other one that we haven't really talked about that um was the the curriculum kind of overview um that Erica had mentioned as she's sort of digging into all of the different curriculums that we're doing across the district with the idea around sort of equity and what does that look like across the district. Um I don't know if that is too much to lump in with the technology and AI piece or that is a separate day. kind of feels like it's a separate day to Yeah, I think it's a separate day.

That's a big It's a lot.

So, and I don't know how much time that one takes for her to, you know, I I know she's she dove in deep starting on July 1st.

It might not be bad to put that 12:01 a.m. But January 14th. Okay. So, we have, you know, progress on district goals, the district scorecard, the high school program of studies. It might be a good fit. Yep.

Yeah. actually the with the district scorecard. That's that's probably a a great spot to put that. And that just reminds me of something else that we have seen. I'm trying to remember if it was on this year's um board eval or not, but we've certainly seen it in prior years. Sort of this thought that we only get sort of that district update once a year. Um, and I don't know what's a better way to to accomplish that, how we get more frequent updates or if you know if the data is so massive that really once a year is the best we're going to get, right? Because it's there's lagging and, you know, those sort of things. But, um, and tell me if if I'm completely off base and we've never heard that in the feedback, but I feel like we have. Um, yeah. I wonder if Erica has any ideas actually on how to present that information.

I know she's she's over by the cookies. She's keeping track of how many cookies we all eat.

Hi. So, Erica Mateo, assistant superintendent. Um, welcome Erica. Also, you're and I didn't I welcomed our new board members but not our new superintendent and assistant superintendent. So, welcome to everyone.

Thank you. Um, so the question specifically is with regard to what beyond the sort of curriculum study, is there something else that you're looking for?

Um, one of the things we've heard is just sort of a more maybe frequent, but I don't know what the right frequency is, just kind of overview of where we are. So, we have this right now in our in our work plan. We have this district scorecard that we look at once a year.

Yeah.

And we all have to remind ourselves like what do these mean? What is growth? What you know all those things. I don't know if there is a different more holistic.

Yeah. Maybe not so data driven. I don't know.

Yeah. Um so growth data versus achievement data versus some sorts some sort of social emotional indicators or climate and culture pieces. Um not everything is a thing we're currently studying or following or measuring. So some of it might be we'd like to learn more about these areas or have some more universal or standard measures. Um my recommendation would be that we do a beginning and endofear data debrief so that you know what is the growth looking like where is the starting place and then where is the delivery at the end of the year. So as we set about our summer work and our planning for the year to come like how we have you know how we've delivered in the year prior and how we are establishing those goals and priorities based on the data and areas we see as identified needs or opportunities for growth. Um yeah and all of that will fall into that broader context of MTSS structures and our cut scores and all the pieces. So, some of it's soft with our um climate and culture pieces and some of it's a little bit more traditional academic achievement and so-called growth. And I can get into the whole growth indicator thing in more depth at some other point.

We'll need a refresher. I do every year, so I'll apologize up front. You have to tell me every year.

There's a lot to it. But yeah, like the climate and culture one, I don't think that's ever anything we've ever gotten in the past. So, um, you know, I think everything you said sounds great. Uh, I don't necessarily think it's fair to throw a beginning of year one at you.

I could probably give you something pretty surface level for beginning of year if that's of interest. Just tell me when. Okay.

And then, um, we'll be looking at recommendations for other pieces, I'm sure. Yeah.

Okay. Um, I mean, I think we're throwing Yeah. Yeah, just just on that while you're still up there, Erica, I think like I would um I'd love that idea of having something at the beginning and something at the end both because that I mean I just like that arc, but I also I think um I'm realizing I would love to have as many moments this year when we can have a an integration between an understanding of where are we right now um and um as we're moving toward both the budget for next year and we're also moving toward the strategic plan to have a little bit more of a sense of um how do those pieces fit together because I think I think honestly I think I don't often have a feeling going into budget season that I really understand kind of the link between um um sort of some of the educational indicators or sort of or that and and where where the budget has again not that the budget was only in relation to that but I think as as many points as we could kind of integrate those things or have sort of um connections would be would be excellent. Supporting each other. Yes. Support each other.

Next meeting might be a good opportunity for just surface level. Y it feels important. Yeah.

So that's also where we put CDS is that because I feel like that's going to be you two, right? That's both of you guys together on that one. So um we're not trying to drive anybody, you know, off the edge too early in the year. Yeah. So, if Yeah, welcome. Here you go. Um, yeah, if you guys think that that that's doable for the 24th, great. Um, if not, we'll we'll figure out a spot for it.

I think it works next meeting.

Okay. Um, anything else that we Yeah, I wanted to revisit the conversation about the strategic communications committee and it's like role of what I I understood it to be board to public communication or district to public communication, but it doesn't seem like that's what it's been historically. Um, yeah. Uh and so that kind of comes from like my own surprise at that and also just in kind of going through the budget process at the tail end last year for the first time. Um how and this is more like you know hearing in the community stuff of folks that I know that are really engaged with the school who still were experiencing confusion. Um, and so to me that tells me that we could maybe communicate better if the folks that really want to support us and like be here and come to the votes and all of those things are and they're still confused. Um, so I just kind of wanted to bring that up as a topic and maybe it's through the strategic comm communications committee or something else. Um, but especially hearing Tom's budget updates and knowing where we're going and I think that that's like a really and all these policies that are very contentious um sometimes. Uh, I think that that's like a piece that could really help us have a smoother path for the year. um if it's an option to consider or look at.

I'm chuckling because you've basically channeled the person who you replaced on the board. Like Candi soapbox was like communicate, communicate, communicate.

Like we need to tell people more things.

So I love that. Uh I'm glad that that is not lost with her departure from the board. So thank you. Um where did we come down on that committee? I felt like we decided it wasn't meeting and because of the strategic plan that we decided when we Oh yeah, that's what I remember.

I was thinking my recollection, which is always uh fuzzy.

This is the problem when we don't have video.

Uh were you going to email us a suggested meeting date? Kelly's nodding her head.

I think I think where we left off was that we were going to defer to Tom and he was going to have a little self brainstorm session with himself about what that what that meant was with Jenny.

Yeah. or Jenny and kind of determine what role and goals that committee might take this year.

I did actually now that you say that. So I did go back the next day and talk with Jenny about it and she had a lot to say about communication that's already happening. Um so I will revisit that with Jenny.

Yeah, I think I mean I'm not on the committee so I don't want to obligate people to time but um I do think it's important um and I do think the conversation the communication does go both ways with that committee. It's probably in the last few years been well the outward communication has mostly been the budget brochure um which um rightly or wrongly that's that's what it has been to make sure we've been getting that out every year and then the information in has been the various surveys whether it's the parent survey or the staff survey and the alternating years. So, um I do think there are kind of it is a a two-way conversation vehicle. Um but it can always be better. Um and I do think your your thought process around sort of thinking ahead to wanting to make sure that you know people who want to engage with us have the information they need to do it uh and are there better ways to do it. I I do sometimes think we get a little bit of, you know, overcommunication fatigue like, well, every meeting is public, every meeting is videoed, we send stuff to everybody's email, we send stuff to their house. And um, you know, there's short of knocking on people's doors. Um, you like what else can we do? But, um, that's not the right way to think about it. There are always other ways. Um, so yeah, I would be really supportive of that committee meeting. um even if it's just to brainstorm about other ways to communicate care. And then I'll go to Kelly.

Yeah, I I don't recall what questions are on the survey or are planned for the focus group right now for strategic planning.

Um but I'm hopeful that this topic will bubble up and that we'll hear feedback from the community about how effective all these communication channels are.

Um, and it might even be helpful to have that list from Jenny of what what is happening, what are we doing already, but the question really is, is it effective? Right? That's what we want to know. And if that, you know, if we can have a um surface level data um conversation at in a the strategic communications um committee that might be helpful.

No, I was just going to mention um I'm not really sure if we need a separate agenda item for this just because normally throughout the course of the year we do have committees report out regularly. So if if we define what the role of this committee is and we actually have some work to do, we'll be reporting that out throughout the year.

That's a Yes, thank you for that. And that's a good that prompted something else to pop into my brain around um wanting to ask folks that are on subcommittees. Policy, finance, and facilities always have sort of a designated spot in those board committee updates. Um but I think we have committees that we don't hear from. Um, do people on other committees would it be helpful if we scheduled maybe not every month but maybe twice a year like region 10 or um DEI or the curriculum committee um to to report out. Okay, it's a little bit more challenging I think for the ones that don't meet regularly because we don't know where to put them on the on the calendar. So maybe we can get together and try and figure out when they are and then we can slate them to make sure that they have a designated spot on on the agenda. And I will uh try to do my best to remind folks that are on those committees that they're coming up for a report so we don't surprise anybody in the meeting. Valerie, I recently started following the town of Freeport on Instagram, and they literally are just disseminating information about the town, like nothing. Just like, "Hey, don't forget there's a three-way stop happening soon.

Hey, don't forget we're having the town council meeting tonight." I'm wondering if it could be something like that, leveraging a informational not asking for opinions, this is what's happening, don't forget this kind of um social media presence. Not I mean, not that feedback isn't welcome, but maybe that's not the forum for it.

Yeah. Well, and on social media, it's actually pretty this is this is my opinion, but it's also like other people's opinion. Um, on social media, you don't want it to be two-way communication because bad things can come in, you know. So, yeah. And if you I mean, if it is sort of a push out of information, I mean, we do have a social media like we do have a Facebook page. I don't know if we have a Instagram page. It would be very simple to tie them together. So, it posts to both because I know not everybody has both. Um, and so, you know, there are I don't know who's responsible for that. I don't know who posts to it. Jenny.

Jenny. Okay. Um, Jenny has a pretty full plate, so let's we'll we'll think on that. Maybe maybe we can get her some support in that. Are you volunteering, Colin? No. Okay.

I was going to volunteer you. Uh, two points. One is Canva premium for a month. So, uh, well, yeah. Well, Well, that's what I was that's why I wanted to give you an opportunity because you are I because you're probably not on camera currently so people can't see that you're working out a dance routine during the uh schoolboard meeting and I just I just wanted to make sure that you know you felt like you had time to share that later. But second, um, perhaps this is a statement of bloody obvious and everybody else knows this or knows that it is is currently happening, but I guess I'm just realizing I don't know whether part of strategic communications remit is an is an analysis of effectively every communication that happens across the school between any part of the school and the public. Um because I think when I think about strategic communications, that's what I think about is basically sort of like how do the letters that are being sent out from mass landing um connect to um later things that are sent out by Tom by Superintendent Gray? How and how does that connect to to like sort of what is the what's our overall strategy for how we're communicating with the public? um and that the budget is then one piece of that but it's not so I I guess in my mind I don't think we need to do as you say I like we're doing a lot on the budget I don't think that's the for me I don't think that's the particular issue I think it's sort of a sort of a larger question of just like how are we communicating and how could we do that perhaps in a more integrated way and a more effective way I guess I just wanted to add where my I wanted to narrow my comment to like what where I see where I'm confused is like bored communication to the public right and that that's I think something that we all have or that has felt like even though the information is out there that sometimes it's not landing and the way that we would hope or that we would expect or that we would like and so maybe there's something that could be done there um and I don't know if that's within the scope of the committee um but um we can make the scope of the committee right exactly and then it comes back to the philosophical question of like the fact what should we be communicating to the public like what is our role right I mean we certainly want people engaged in the budget process because that is their role to play in that is the vote right and that's why we want to make sure people are informed and have the information they need to make an informed vote um but then you know is it our is it our job to to reach out and share other things right like where we want their feedback around say something like the strategic plan it is right? Because that we run that process and we solicit the feedback. Um, yeah, that's an interesting question.

There there is an argument to be made that it it strengthens the district for the public to know more broadly what's happening in the schools.

And you know what what a number of districts that I have known have have turned to is actually somebody who's taking this on as a primary role, not just doing it off the side of their desk. And as the world of communication becomes more complex um you know there there are arguments to make that investment but that's an investment to think about in the context of every other investment you want to make um with you know going up 7.1%. Right. I mean that when I when I think of this, what makes me want to pursue that more as a board member is when I hear us talking about why we want the high school students and other students to have buy in with the cell phone policy is because then it feels like we're collaborate collaboratively making a policy choice. And as we're heading into places where we're going to continue to see budget increases, having a greater collaboration with our communities feels like it would be useful to us as a board and as a district. Yeah, it certainly doesn't hurt, right?

the more people know about what we're doing that you know when all they hear when all they see is 7.1 and they know nothing other than that well that's there are amazing things happening in the schools and and you know most people doesn't cross their radar yeah and just and just to be clear that I think that's also part of what kind of what I meant about the strategic communication as I'm sort of thinking about it is like yes what what does the board communicate about because it's not being communicated elsewhere or what is the board communicating about because we really want to amplify something and then what's not our lane because that is being handled by the superintendent's office or that is being handled by the high school or like so just again to understand kind of like the full picture of that to sort of know oh this is when these communications are going out here's how they're integrated here how they reinforce each other or here's how they contrast I think like having an understanding of that would be really helpful I mean all I'm saying any posters Instagram Instagram graphics. I got all of the gifts. Like, I'm ready.

But only until next month when they charge her again. We got to get those done before October.

Isn't there a bus we can sell to like get her the account? Like, we may have Did we sell Did we sell that bus already?

We may have been talking about selling a Gator today. I'm like, maybe we can get Phoebe to buy that.

Stay tuned.

And then I have one more question. With the sheet that's like all of the committees and the times that they meet and who's on them, will that be updated so that um I'm sure it already has. Um I'm guessing once we all changed who was on what, she probably did. Uh and as I'm pretty sure she did.

Yeah. Uh she's she's pretty speedy on that. Um where it lives is a great question other than in on Jenny's computer. So, uh, maybe we can ask her to share that website. I don't know if it is. Okay.

Um, cuz it's really kind of a tool we built to make sure.

I got confused at one point like what do we have to have? What is a choice that we have? Um, we color coded them based on like like the amount of time effort, you know, like the Freeport cable TV one was green and then negotiations for the teacher contract was, you know, bright red, you know, just in terms of time and stuff like that. So, um, anyway, uh, so how do people feel about the work plan?

I think we picked up student leadership once, maybe twice. Uh, we picked up CDS at the meeting on the 24th. Um, AI and technology, we're going to tag that on for SAM in December 10th. Uh, curriculum with sort of the equity lens is going to be a part of the district scorecard on January 14th.

uh we'll capture the um PD offerings when the administrators are doing their um their updates/goals when we hear from them in the fall. Um cell phone uh we put on twice, once on October 8th and then again on November 5th for a follow-up. Did I miss anything?

Yeah. Um well, a couple of things. um the AI and technology one. Would that make sense to also ask the administrators to add to their reports or is that too much since we were talking about how it'd be nice to know how each I don't know if they're all equipped to really give a lot on that right now.

And I think it could be something that Sam gathers as a part of what he's presenting kind of how we're using it.

What's that? And Erica. Yes. And Erica. Yeah.

Okay. And I think Erica had also mentioned gate earlier. Is there something? Oh, yes.

Chapter 104 and the M. You're just filling your own plate here, Erica.

Yeah. Um, we could It is a It is a specific program um written into statute, so I don't know if you want it bundled with MTSS or if you'd like to do it separately.

Does it in my head they're different but does it make sense to bundle them together?

Um so multilingual uh programming is separated. Um I would say keep it as two separate items but potentially on the same night if that makes sense. But okay. Yeah.

Um so multilingual learners we have on October 22nd. Um, and then did we say the MTSS piece would be part of that curriculum overview or is that a separate?

I can do that at any point. Um, deeper in the year a little bit would offer maybe some more direction.

So March 11th is sort of a a budget deliberation. So that's the only thing we have on that meeting. Not that we won't fill all that all those moments with exciting budget talk, but maybe it'd be good for us to have something else to think about.

Does that is that enough time into the year? You think it is? And then what about the the chapter 104 at that point or at some other point?

Does it make sense to keep those two together on the 11th? Yeah.

Okay. So March 11th. So MTSS and GATE. Yeah.

Okay. Uh, Danielle, do I see your hand? Are you good?

Have we bitten off more than we can chew? It's a lot.

We We'll give you one out when you two get out of this meeting in the next couple days and you look at this and you're like, "Oh my god, why did we agree to all that?" We we we can revisit if we need to, but we'll put this we this seems like a great work plan in the meantime.

Okay. Thank you.

Yeah. I just wanted to give everyone an update on my tiny group that I'm making.

It's going to be called um the scoop special committee on our phones and I'll lure them with ice cream.

So they will be here.

O U P S C O U P O O O I can't spell scoop. Okay.

Um All right. So now that we've done all of this uh the work plan, we are to the um the district goal which I think it's in our folder, isn't it?

Oh, it's literally on the is it? Yeah, it's it's on the agenda, but yeah, I think it's the same thing that's on that page.

Yeah. to engage stakeholders in the community of RSU5 in a comprehensive and inclusive process to collaborative collaboratively develop the five-year strategic plan.

I think Colin's previous concerns about sort of the lack of teeth of of that being the whole district's goal for the year are um are uh understandable. Um but I will turn back to our work plan of lots of great work that will be done this year.

Um that while we may not have a shiny, you know, four goal bucket to like tag each one of these things to yet, progress will be made.

I think my I I have a a rewarding suggestion for this for this one because I feel like we're doing the board is responsible for more than engaging the stakeholders in this. I think and I guess my question is is is the goal ultimately to develop or approve a strategic plan this year?

It is and rather than just engaging the stakeholders. So I would propose saying that our goal is to collaboratively develop or approve, whatever word we want to go with, a five-year strategic plan through a comprehensive and inclusive process that engages stakeholders in the RSU5 communities.

I'm not adding too many words there. I'm really just just re reordering them. Yeah.

Um but with the focus being on developing it and approving it, but also making it comprehensive and inclusive.

Nothing mind chattering. I really like that.

Say that again. Yeah. Uh to collaboratively develop. Do I have a motion for consideration and approval for the RSU5 district goal for 2526 to here's where you say it to collaboratively develop or approve whichever word we all agree on a five-year strategic plan through a comprehensive and inclusive process that engages stakeholders in the ROS5 communities develop and approve.

I would I like that. Yeah, I think I like you're gonna want to approve it.

Y are you making that motion?

Thank you. Second from Malik. So motion from Kelly, second from Malik.

Any other comments other than Thank you for the rewarding, Cara. I like that.

Yeah, I really like it. I think it really better defines what the goal actually is. It puts it front and center. Thank you, Cara.

My other note is, do we all like the word stakeholders or do we want to change that to just people? That could be a whole conversation, but does anyone have Carrie? Have you ever considered joining the policy committee?

I don't like I like I like to reword I you don't like stakeholders.

I think everybody is a stakeholder in our district, right?

Some may not see themselves as such, but do we want to change it to something like community members? It's more than members though. Yeah, it's more than staff.

It's a huge range of people and I think stakeholders.

I like stakeholders. I think it kind of gets everyone. You think it's put offish or something?

Okay. Very much for Is it too corporate?

We're looking at the stakeholder policy tomorrow. It's first first on our She's preparing.

No, we're not. Um but yeah, I think that's fantastic. And also I think you know to your to your um to your point about the work plan and also your sort of gesture to Superintendent Gray to sort of be like is this too much? I think like I think actually at the end of the day I think the evaluation of like does the work plan serve that is the determination of is the work plan right? Um so I think like based on the conversation I think the work plan does serve that end um from a variety of different angles. Um so I think again that would be the only thing I'd be wary of pulling anything out that we've talked about on the work plan. um sort of just check it against that first before we chuck it.

Okay. You you can call me Tom. I mean it's up to you. We don't have a policy on that yet.

I always tell people in our new board member orientation. We are only like quasi formal. There will be no like I agree with the former speaker.

But we do raise our hands because you know it is a school board after all. Uh, all right. So, we have a motion and a second on the floor. Any other comments, questions? All those in favor?

Great. Thank you.

All right. So, new business. Uh, budget timeline, pink paper in your in your uh packets.

Um, this should look pretty familiar at this point. Um I don't think we have um we have changed anything on here other than we did add the date for the uh leadership meeting with the towns uh in December um December 3rd. We extended that invitation to uh the chairs of the select boards and the town councils and the administrators from each town. Um, I don't know if they've RSVPd yet, but it's always a great great conversation. Um, and this is that's probably the only change from the last time you saw this, comments, questions, Steph, what happens at that? What is that? So that um that was uh born out of kind of some to your point confusion around like what's happening, what are we seeing for budgets, what are they seeing for budgets, um other things that are happening across the um the communities that maybe we could collaborate on. Um we ended up with a um position for a person who is a uh fields person for us in the summer and is a driver for plow trucks for the town of Freeport in the winter. So we don't both have to find somebody. We share that position. Um we I'm just giving you some examples of things that have come out of those meetings in the past. We have done some shared purchasing for like paving those sort of oh we're doing a big project so are we like you know you get cheaper when you buy in bulk. Um and we just you know kind of throw out things that are happening in the individual towns or in the district because you know we have our own budget that we're responsible for but it's not in a vacuum. you know, each town is doing something. Each, you know, the the the town of Durham is moving to a July 1 fiscal year this year, right? So, everyone in Durham just got an 18month tax bill that blew everybody's mind, right? So, um which is fine because it's 18 months. It's not your taxes didn't go up 50% for anybody who's watching and hasn't figured that out yet.

Um but just different things that are happening so that we can kind of plan you know just having all of the information I guess. So it was just a way of to share information and see if we could find efficiencies.

Any other comments, questions? Yeah, I think just a comment and it's I don't think it's anything to add to the or any that would need to be reflected in the document, but just as I was thinking about last year's budget process um and where we might have been able to do better in terms of communication [Music] uh with within the board, but also between the board and um the superintendent is sort of I maybe I kind of um of identifying for oursel sort of where in the process um if we are asking the superintendent to go back and adjust something like when is that moment kind of when is that um again because my sense is that's a little bit where things maybe got a little ary um is that it sort of it that maybe didn't happen early enough or did it sort of or which I guess would mean too Right. Um but I'm just sort of wondering whether like um that kind of March 11 um date is sort of like something where we can kind of again not not to have anything like set in stone but just to say like all right coming into that meeting um can we as a board um be thinking about you know if uh if we're thinking about adjustments or if things are looking if if there's a sense that things are not um the report is not looking like it is going to support the proposed budget to sort of just have a moment where we could all kind of say, you know, let's let's look at let's look at that moment. Um, again, nothing set in stone, but um that we all might kind of know that that would be um part of the conversation there like before we leave that night. It's sort of like are we more or less going in the direction of supporting the budget or are we really saying this is not what the board wishes to pursue?

If if you're asking me, I I mean I I think it's it's somewhere there in March since we adopt it in March.

Yeah, it's got to happen sometime. It's not it's not going to be later.

I think probably that March 18th date is a good is a sort of a good make or break date.

Yeah, I would say I I mean my only hesitation like I understand the concept and the idea around it and I agree um in in reality how it plays out. I would say usually that March 11th date is that date that we're kind of you're like, "Hey, we'd love to see, you know, if you were going to do this, like what might that look like?" And they come back with some options for the next one. Because if you guys recall, generally how it works is that coming out of that 18th meeting, we have basically decided um because we tried to know that number of what we're going to adopt the following week so that the papers are all ready for us to go. Now, we can we don't have to and this year we didn't. we, you know, we were spreadsheeting on the fly there, uh, up until the very last moment. Um, but absent this year, I would say typically that March 11th date you've identified is usually where there would be some questions around, you know, oh my gosh, this is too high. We need to see something, you know, how might you address this and and not have it this big or, oh gez, this is way too low. Um, well, and at that point, you you'll have actually seen it six weeks before, right? we've seen all the presentations because really that's the key, right? Is the presentations is where we hear the why behind like because the first one is sort of the overview and we can we'll get the bottom line number usually around you know the budget increase. Um but you know really the the rubber meets the road if you will when we talk when we hear from each of the administrators and the directors around like this is their recommendations and this is why.

Um, so you know, I I think that March 11th date is a is a good one to be shooting for. And I think that's historically kind of that point in the in the process where we do that. Just didn't happen this year. Kelly.

Yeah. But that does bring up a good point that when we get those budget presentations from the various buildings and departments that we should be a little bit maybe a little bit more proactive about raising those questions in those meetings while they're there.

While they're there. Yeah. so that we can sort of get people thinking about our our input a little bit earlier in the process if possible.

Yeah, it's it's it's tough, right?

Because part of it is I don't want to make a decision in a bubble, right? I want to look at the whole the whole story, which is I want to hear from everybody. Um because I think one of the one of the things our district does do well is the collaboration amongst the admin team. It's not like siloed budgets. It's like they have come together and said, you know, for the good of the district, this is where we really need to prioritize this in this school and I'm willing to I'm willing to sort of sit back on something maybe I'd love to have this year because we really want to do that for them. Um, so it's hard to kind of pick individual ones out of the but yeah, we can certainly be asking more questions in those.

Yeah. And I think again I think the spirit of my comments are not to adjust the timeline, but also I think it's to just for us to be having this conversation honestly just so we as a board are thinking about this ahead of time. And I guess it even uh makes I mean maybe just the only thing I might I don't know maybe it's not appropriate but I was thinking of like if we we get we'll get the present we'll get the budget on the 28th and then the week later is when we first start getting presentations. I wonder if if I'm remembering the process correctly, there's no moment basically until March 11 where we actually have a conversation about anything. Um, so I wonder whether it might not be a bad idea to build into like February 4th sort of initial gut check, like gut check. Yeah. Sort of like, you know, what are people thinking about coming out of that? like what are the things that have kind of risen to the surface? Um and you know maybe even have that before the before those presentations.

Oh, I think we'd have to, right? Because otherwise that wouldn't really be fair.

No, it would not. No. Yeah. No, that was I was trying to set that up that logic.

Um but yeah, just to sort of to say like all right, like Yeah. So again, um we have a marker.

We love it. Everything looks everything's great. Great. Great job, Tom. Like you and your team, you know, like you nailed it or like, oh wait, it's way too high. you know, like just we have a little bit of a thing like, oh, okay, so that's kind of where we're going. And then um the uh administrators and and directors know what they're presenting to. Um and we also have a little bit of a sense of kind of what our compass is going forward. Again, nothing nothing final on that, but again, just sort of uh I think it would be helpful if that gut check could be framed in terms of what you're curious about.

Yeah. Right. And maybe it's actually on the 28th because generally we get the on the 28th and we ask no questions other than like clarifying questions. Um, and we don't really weigh in on and I think I think that's intentional.

I agree with that because I I don't want to I don't want to give a gut check before, you know, Julie gets up and she's like, "Oh, Jesus, that's not that's not what I would have said if I'd known this was what they were thinking five minutes before." Right? So, um I my only hesitation is it's hard.

I don't know. I think I think we are um open-minded enough as a board to not, you know, not drop the hammer on the 28th before having all the information in front of us, right, without hearing all the presentations. But I do think it's fair to maybe just give a a sort of a superficial perspective on what we've heard around sort of the full proposed budget. Um because maybe that will then help the presentations target what some of our questions are earlier.

Right. I I agree with that. as long as like you said they're they're really more like the questions really not not like oh we we don't like this because it's not below 8% that's too but so yeah just kind of thinking about it very with very broad brush strokes coming in not having heard any of the information from the presentations yet I would be very cautious about drawing conclusions right the gut check conclusions right because we you know we could I'm trying to think back of what we would have seen on that that meeting in January last year where we could have said like, okay, I want to know how they're going to meet these needs based on eliminating this teacher, right? Like I I'd love to hear more about that when they're presenting to us, that kind of thing.

Yeah, I think that would be really helpful because I I feel like I remember leaving that meeting with where it was presented and then kind of no context beyond just that and wishing that we had had more. or had been able to have some sort of discussion.

Yeah, it's I mean I think it was uh specifically designed that way to just okay here's the top and then we're going to give you all of the information you need as opposed to like just starting with a specific school or a specific line item or um you know it's sort of like as a district this is this is what we're tackling and this is how we're kind of tackling it as a group and then we'll hear all the details over the upcoming six weeks. Um, so I I can see the benefits of both approaches. Um, but obviously last year's how it rolled out showed up on the con side of that is that we ended up very much at the end with a lot of moving parts.

So I'm not sure how it would have been different had we done it this way, but maybe it would have. So we're happy to try it.

I think it absolutely would have been different because I think we would have said in that meeting why is this why are we aiming for this percentage nobody asked for this percentage and so why are you making these cuts and then the then the the presentation could have been made um oh because it will improve these learning outcomes and then we would have proceeded from there. Yeah.

So I think I mean I guess that's where I would only disagree a little bit Kelly.

I think that is the moment where we where we say like woo that's like again not to say like go back and change the number but just to say like this doesn't like this feels low or this feels this feels just again or I'm I'm trying to figure out how to I curious I'm curious I'm curious about this number I'm curious about how where this number came from right and um not to say sort of directed but to say before we start hearing any of the building administrator presentations on really where this is coming from um what's the board thinking about I think I don't know I think that's a um I don't think we need to get into the minutia but I think like a little bit at that level because honestly I think that would have saved us a lot of headache.

I think it would also be fair in the interim for you to sit with it and then email questions in writing that you hope may come up and be answered in the presentations. Um you know speaking as an administrator who has been through that ringer as they call it. Um I mean well one of the reasons I feel really good working I you will I know you will be fair and kind and it is it's not easy to you know be in the spotlight that way and especially if there are controversial things to be discussed or proposed. Um and you know our administrators are human beings and um any kind of lead time that we or they can get to be able to anticipate and get good answers will be helpful.

Okay. So, that was a FYI in your folders. Um, oh, sorry. Yeah.

Um, if this is a this is a public facing document, correct? Like this is on our website for the public. I wonder if uh I'm not sure what the two lines are on this document, but I'm wondering Yeah, I don't either. If we if this would be if that second line would be a good place to say when the budget brochures go out if we added something saying that at this point you would expect to receive Yeah. I mean it definitely happens at that line because they have it before the Q&As's.

We might not know the exact date but if we you might want to add something there.

What was that?

The budget brochure. Uh um to add on to that point too this I'm uh airing my ignorance of town meetings and voting in town meeting forum. Um to me the annual budget meeting does not tell me that I as a public a member of the public would vote at that meeting and also the validation referendum like I think explicit these are votes where the public um engagement really matters is important to explicitly state if possible. Yeah. I mean it could even be I mean because the Q&As are too right. So, you know, maybe it's uh well, we have public input, so we could put, you know, an asterisk and then, you know, asterisk is where, you know, this is this is your part to play, Michelle.

Mhm. I mean just on that again going to the kind of strategic communications piece of saying like is there a is there a moment where somebody whether it's um Tom's office or us sends out a narrative version of this um as an email to the whole community and says of the timeline and says like you know we're we're starting this process here's what these things mean like this like during this chunk of time we're going to be we're presented the board deliberates and and here's things then these are your opportunities to come there's a half hour like narrating it. Um because I think to Stephanie's point that's not necessarily obvious. Um and I think it's probably only if you go looking for it.

I'll I'll check with Jenny about that.

Now, one of the things she was just telling me this morning is that she was, you know, explaining all of the different ways that we do communicate about this. And I know one of them was a brochure that goes out to people's mailboxes, like a snail mail brochure.

That's the budget brochure. That's That's this. Okay. So, and that's that's another place where I I think explicit statements that you can vote as a town. Yeah, exactly. This is where you come.

This is where you can vote and etc.

But also like last year's budget, we didn't send it out in the mail because it was too late. protracted.

Uh yeah. Yeah. We um we posted it. We had it at every town we had printed copies at every town office. We just let people know where they could find it because we couldn't get it to print because because we didn't have the the date here and we changed it here. We weren't able to print it because it's a pretty tight timeline. Yeah.

And we find a new printer. It seems to me like last year or maybe the year before, maybe she does it every year, but Jean did such a thing like a narrative in the forecaster and maybe somewhere else too, but just Yeah, I'm pretty sure that that did happen on some platform.

And I also call everybody's house and tell them to vote. I do that. I ruined everyone's dinner. one.

Yeah, one back.

I will say that I'm not sure that's going to be as effective this year. I don't know if anybody else is getting robocalls from the IRS, but I am.

You should call them back.

Multiple a day. They leave a 30 secondond voicemail. It is like I don't answer my phone anymore. Like regardless of who's calling.

The good news is it does say RSU5 when I call. So generally people will pick it up. Say RSU IRS.

All right.

Are we good with our Are we good with that one?

Okay. So, the next item we have and had I thought this through, we probably would have done this on a day where Mora is here and not not here. Um, so I don't know if we want to. I went to the meeting on Monday, so I have a little bit of info on this, right? Yeah.

Um, so this this is a bigger packet than we usually get of information. Um, but this is the MSBA uh delegate um delegate assembly. We talked a little bit about this at the retreat. Um this is the body that basically um develops the plan of the work plan if you will for the um the MSBA lobbying arm. Um and uh up at up in Augusta. Um and so each year they uh undertake a slate of resolutions. Sometimes they um adjust others uh previous ones. Sometimes they have fully new ones. Um, this one it looks like they've done a fair amount of rewrites for previous ones um and and some new ones um and some for deletion. So that's interesting. Um so what we have done historically is kind of talk through the resolutions as a board um and given some uh instruction indication to the delegate which is Steph this year and Mora is the um is the backup because she'll be there anyway because she's on the MSBA board um around how we would like folks to vote on these. Um, so, um, that's kind of the that's kind of the overview of of what we're we're looking at. Um, and then I'll ask Steph what she learned.

There's also, um, we can suggest modifications until like the start of October if there's something that we didn't like or we wanted different language on. That's also something that some other districts did at the meeting that I was at and we can still do via email. I think it's until like October 8th or something, October 10th, maybe. Yeah, something like that. Anyway, early October. Um, okay. So, um, and then I can the there there's like the new ones, uh, the deletions. They gave me a little bit more information about what the deletions are around and why they were deleted. Okay.

And then some folks asked questions. We didn't get into all the um edits are like not substantially changing the the meaning of something. It's just more like language or grammar or consistency.

Um and then rewrites there is more substantial um reasoning and and it's changing more substantively uh what the resolution is. Um and so those were there's a lot more of those but those were gone over more high level. So, if anyone had any specific questions, I could maybe ask answer some of them or um yeah, I'll pause there.

Okay. Um have they is this the most upto-date?

There's one other version that um had one small edit, but this is otherwise the most up to date. The edit is on the first page um in the bottom rationale section. uh second line, regardless of immigration status instead of regardless of education status.

That's the only edit that I was made aware of. Okay.

Just if we really just wanted to be um pedantic, we also could suggest that at the top of the title spells proposed correctly.

Pursed is fine.

That may have been uh updated too, but I didn't catch it either. That's not even close to spelled right. That's not even a word, is it?

It's what happens when you use all caps.

It doesn't pick it up as a misspelled word. Okay. So, um so proposed resolutions. The first is the role of the US Department of Education. And so the main the MSBA fundamentally supports the original mission of the US uh department of education to promote student achievement and preparation for global competitiveness by fostering educational excellence and ensuring equal access. MSBA opposes any effort that reduces federal funding to main schools. Any such change would disproportionately hurt or excuse me harm rural students, those with disabilities and children from economically disadvantaged communities.

Um so uh and then they provide the rationale um talking about certain uh federal funds have already been withheld creating budget challenges in many districts.

Other proposals from the federal government would effectively restructure many federal funding streams and reduce funding from current levels. These grants serve a valuable purpose helping to fund uh positions such as math and reading coaches, interventionists, guidance counselors, and before and after school activities. any cuts would result in the loss of programming and or increases in the local school budgets.

Um so sometimes their their um their proposed uh resolutions are kind of philosophical um which I is the category I kind of put this one like they're just like what do we stand for kind of of statements. Um, do we do we have any concern with with a yes vote on this proposal or do we have any recommendations to make it even more strong? One recommendation that another board suggested is the last sentence of the resolution is any such change would harm all students disproportionately rural, those with disabilities and children from economically disadvantaged communities. So they thought it was important to say that it would um negatively impact all students as well, not just the ones specifically named. So I could be on board with either of those.

So yes on one.

I would just say yes on one and and for stuff no on anything watering it down.

Yeah. Um, so this level or I guess up stronger. Um, yep. Okay. Uh, two is a tax policy. The main school boards association believes revenue sources to fund public schools should be raised in a fair and equitable manner based on a taxpayers's ability to pay. Um, so that's the resolution. The rationale is the main legislator is considering several proposers proposals that would impact the EPS funding formula. So for our new board members, the EPS funding formula is the essential programs and services. That is what the DOE uses to determine um how much they would say it costs to educate a student.

Um and that is what is used to determine um subsidy. So that formula um is uh currently under under review. So multiple bills call for the creation of a new state funding streams to fund K12 public education. More state funding for schools is badly needed. Local property taxpayers already face substantial burdens. Yet school districts face growing expenses such as rising special education costs and the maintenance and upkeep of aging school infrastructures.

This resolution would provide more guidance to the MSBA's legislative committee as it evaluates legislative proposals affecting main school funding.

I don't know. I mean, I guess I'm not a no vote on this. I don't think it says anything particularly interesting. Um, I mean, fair and equitable manner based on a taxpayer's ability to pay. I mean that's always the question is is what is a taxpayers's ability to pay based off of.

So I mean this is a obviously a deeply complex issue around the EPS formula and and how funding in for education is is determined. Um I'm not sure how this resolution helps guide anyone's decision- making.

I think it was meant to be more for the legislative process that's currently um underway or those who are advocating for different legislation, right? So maybe some of the bills out there are completely unfair and unequitable. And so this I guess comes down on the side of we think it should be at least fair and equitable.

I mean I'm I'm not a no on this. I'm just not sure how helpful it is. Other thoughts on this one?

I guess I just have a I would I have a question that maybe I don't know Steph if they went over this or but maybe and maybe Mara could Mara if you're watching this video um get back to us next meeting um of just whether whether the MSBA has uh has issued any further uh has has made any further statements about these new um uh potential um revenue sources or um or proposals, right? Because if this is the only one, I find that a little curious if if sort of the only thing that the MSBA is saying is like make sure that taxes are fair and equitable and not saying anything further about effectively what's in the rationale, right? Like what's in the rationale is much more substantive in terms of it seems like what we're or what a body could be saying, right? is that like um this is needed um and it needs to be shifted or not uh additional support needs to be given um beyond uh what the state is currently providing.

Okay.

I don't have any other information to on that one. Okay.

Yeah. Okay. Uh number three for newly proposed resolutions immigrants do. Yeah.

Do we have a do I have a proposed vote on that or are we were we we're waiting for Mara on that?

I mean, I don't see us voting no on that. I mean, I'm not sure what the recommendation could change to that would switch your vote from a yes to a no. Um I mean, if somebody made the motion that, you know, RSU 5 should pick up the bill for all the surrounding towns, that's a definite no vote from you. Um but yeah.

Yeah. I guess um one question I I have about how it's worded that might more that might better capture the rationale is it says more state funding for schools is badly needing needed but the the actual resolution doesn't address if we're asking for more than we are already asking for or if we're just going to change formulas somehow so that you know what I'm saying are we saying that are trying to support bills that will increase state taxes in a way that they I I I guess I'm just wondering how does the more get addressed?

Yeah. Well, I think the implication is that um more from the state is fair based on taxpayers ability to pay, right? So there are districts where the the local taxpayer ability to pay is very different than other parts of the state.

So if it's if it's too reliant on local taxes, those students are at a disadvantage.

Um so revenue sources to fund it should be raised in a fair and equitable manner. I don't think it's saying that more money needs to be raised. It's just how like where it's coming from. But that's what the rational says, right? Well, more state, right? So there I think the implication when I read that is is that it should be less local taxpayer funded more state funded and how do you how do you capture that? Um I mean part of what the EPS formula does is it says like you know this is how much it should cost to educate a student and some of those numbers are significantly lower than it actually costs to educate a student. So if if those numbers or those formulas were more inclusive, it it would flow through that you would get more subsidy, right?

Because they would say it costs more to educate these students. This is the total bucket we think it costs to educate them. Your how much you're required to pay through the local uh requirement um would would not necessarily change. So the difference is your subsidy. So that would that would leave less to be paid through additional local monies if that makes sense. I I I I see what you're saying. Um yeah, I guess it just goes back to the vagory that you mentioned in the beginning. I guess it doesn't really say a lot about what this means.

I wonder if it would if they should consider adding that the third sentence in the rationale to the actual resolution.

More state funding for schools is badly needed or some version of that.

They do seem to be I mean I think the title right tax policy I think is kind of vague is is both vague but also I think they're I think they're actually trying to be specific. They're sort of like this is the only thing we're commenting on. We're only commenting on like whatever tax policy gets created. Um it's not like the title of it is not um uh need need for new revenue sources, right? It's sort of just saying like whatever the tax whatever tax policy the state has regarding education, this should be true. I agree with you. It it means not it doesn't mean nothing, but like it doesn't really mean anything.

It's like yes, because if you take the opposite of it, it's a ridiculous statement. Right.

Um I think it should be unfair and inequitable. Right.

There's another um edit later about school construction where it's like the last the last one in this packet where it's like very clearly they're taking a position that the funding should come from other sources besides property tax particularly for school construction. Um and so there's sort of like some language there as well. So there's other places where I guess their rationale is reinforced a little more specifically in in specific ways. Yeah.

For what that's worth.

All right. Are we good with a yes on two then?

I'm sorry. Um, I'm just wondering if it makes sense to actually insert that more or suggest that as an edit between believes and revenue just to put believes more revenue sources to fund should be raised in a fair and equitable manner since that's in their rationale.

I'm not sure. I mean because they're not saying believes revenue sources to fund public schools. So that's all revenue sources.

That's the state, that's local, that's all the things. I'm not saying I'm not sure what they're saying is that more revenue needs to be generated. I think they're saying it how it's like where those different buckets comes from needs to be fair and equitable.

But maybe I'm misreading it. Yeah. To me, it sounds like they're trying to say we need to be we should be less reliant on local taxes if it's less equitable to do that.

Meaning, if the if the local, I don't know, community can't support the basics of education, where else are we going to get get that money? Because we still need to support that education, right? So, that's what's the crux of it seems to be. I think so. I think that's exact. Yeah.

Yeah. I don't think they're they're taking a stand on like how much is spent on education. I think they're taking a stand on how the revenue is raised.

But it's talking about revenue sources.

We're talking about more revenue sources, not necessarily the total pot. So, right. Exactly. Yeah.

I I agree with that. That would be the wording change. Say it again.

More revenue sources, not necessarily more revenue. Oh, I see. Yep. Believes more revenue sources to fund should be.

I think that changes the rest of the sentence. Yeah, I think the raised makes it weird. Yeah, I could ask for clarity.

Yeah. And and maybe that's the question is is like, you know, what what are we trying to get at here? Is there a way to be more clear in what we're trying to accomplish? You know, maybe that third sentence belongs in some form or fashion moved up to be to be more clear.

Okay. Um, immigrant students. The main schoolboard association is committed to maintaining a safe and secure learning environment for all students, sta staff, and visitors and believes that regardless of their immigration status, no student should be denied a free public education.

Uh rationale, the 1982 Supreme Court case, Pier V. Do declared that all US children have a constitutional right to a public education regardless of immigration status. In Maine, schools have seen a growing number of immigrant students in recent years. in the midst of changing policies at the local, state, and national levels. This resolution affirms a commitment to providing an education to all students in Maine and aligns with the MSBA's core mission of enhancing the education of all students in Maine's public schools.

Concern. Yeah, Chris.

Um, my only thought on that would be it's it's a negative statement at the end. Instead of it being a negative, have it be a positive. As in, instead of saying no student should be denied a free public education, say something to the effect of every student should have access to a free public education. Something like that. I like that.

Any other thoughts on that one?

I think we are firmly a yes on this. Yes, that feels like a yes or plus, right?

Definitely nothing watering that one down. Yeah. Yeah. Great.

Okay. Um, I don't think I'm going to read through all the deletions. Um, yeah, I do have a question about the rationale for 2A1A.

Did they talk about that one at all? Was the first one on the 281? Yes. So, um, it's now required by statute. So, they no longer need to have a policy on it, a resolution on it.

Um, and then the others essentially is the same. It's either like there was a statute or it happened at the federal level or there's another policy that's replacing it or adding more um emphasis to it in another modification later in the document. Um or in the second one uh parenting education you can see is last amended in 99 the shift has been to parental involvement. So there's like rationale for all or it's being addressed in another way for all the removals. It does make you wonder why nobody's thought to get rid of this in the last 26 years. But I guess it's only fair we probably have a fair number of policies too that we're we're working our way through. So um okay. So we then have edits which don't substantially change the intent or meaning.

Um, any concerns on any of those Michelle? I had a question. Yep.

So, the one uh it's 2A 3F on the business employment of students. Yep.

Who's regulating that? like who's are we keeping a list of who's working and if they're not they actually are working too many hours and if they have bad grades and can't be working those hours like how is that well this one is not a law this is just their resolution right yeah but so what does that mean though like so the main school board association reminds reminds don't forget uh local school boards of the statute so there is a statute regarding employment of students during the school year as well as limits to work permits for students with inappropriate attendance or grades. Uh we do we would I haven't dug into this yet, but if we're like any other district, we do keep a record of when we issue a work permit.

Yeah. And that I mean you would only have a work permit if they're under 16, right? So there's no how would you govern a 16year-old who doesn't come to you for a work permit? You would have no idea if they had a job or not.

Yeah.

Right. And you could go to the town technically for a work permit because my daughter did that because school was out. So interesting.

Um yeah, I do think there is a law though that you can only work up to I want to say it's like 30 hours if you're an act. Is it 20?

Yeah, it depends on how old you are. So, and this is more for if the student works for the Well, that's what I was wondering because I mean we do have some students that like work in Laugh and Learn and the FAC on the FP pack. Right. So, um it's an interesting question if particularly if we are their employer. Is there any tracking of their grades or attendance to ensure that they are compliant?

Right. Maybe we could get clarity on what this is trying to what type of employment this is trying to get at. Is it all is it by the district?

Yeah, I'll just I'll just note too that this is um this is a an edit which means that this is already in place and so the modifications that there's the only thing that they're asking us to approve as modifications is the red language.

Yeah. So I think it's more of a question of like I wonder if we're doing this. Yeah, totally.

My question, are we doing this? And who's doing this? Sorry.

So maybe that's a question for Kelly and and uh the folks in HR. Yeah.

Around employee. I mean, I don't think I'm not sure there is any possible way if they don't work for us that we could ever track it or should be expected to track it. But I mean, I wonder what the statute they're referring to says because it doesn't reference the statute.

I suppose that could be one recommendation is that they include what statute.

Yeah. So we know to look it up and see if we're good.

The boards uh school boards of statute blank that certainly find out the statute for everyone.

I also just want to give you something to do because it's fun to kind of raise your hand and be like I do need more to do. So thank you in the meeting. He means yeah no in the meeting.

Not just in general in your life. I mean, it does say businesses and potential employers. So, I think maybe it is the entire community.

Well, I mean, we can certainly control it when they come to us for a permit to say, "No, you don't come to school. We're not going to issue you a permit.

We don't think you should have a job." Um, your job is to come to school. But like once it's issued, I don't know how we would ever track it.

You can't revoke it. I don't believe can you? I don't know.

How about as a business owner owner? I'm pretty sure no one's ever asked us about kids grades or how much they're working, right?

Yeah.

Or that family loophole when you work for your family. Yeah. Yeah.

Yeah. The rules don't apply. They can work you as much as they want.

You should see how much Danielle works for kids. I see rich more than I see the kids.

All right. So, AI. The next one, um, I looked at that one just because, you know, we were talking about AI and this one was new. This was a new one last year, um, that got put in place. Um, and it looks like the only change is, you know, adding, uh, awareness of potential dangers. So, okay. Um, there was talk about this one, too. Um, another district suggested that at the end it end with AI is not a substitute for school work period and that they remove the that requires original thought uh from it.

Yeah. Uh, and then they also said that they'll likely be revisiting this policy quite frequently for a while. So it will keep this one will will morph through the years. Yeah. What if could we propose AI is not a substitute for school work semicolon school work requires original thought.

I'm happy to send that email and adding schoolwork again. Okay. Um so then we have a few more a few more adjustments. Um yeah, air tapes.

Um on the what is it 2A2E advertising in the schools? Did they give you any justification on that edit? Cuz for me it substantially changes the meaning of that. I mean before they said that they're encouraging us to prohibit advertisements and now they're saying you should adopt a policy which is a very different meeting in my mind and a meeting that I don't think I would approve of. Like I liked the prohibition, so I would vote no on that edit.

Yeah, I didn't get any additional info on that one. Yeah, it's Yeah, I wonder what's the underline of the one they then crossed out. I'm confused.

It looks like that the prohibition was on certain products, not uni, it wasn't a universal prohibition. So instead, I think it it sounds like they want people to be more thoughtful and have more local control over that in instead of just a broad prohibition on these certain minimum nutritional products.

Right. Right. Yeah. Because that's what I said before, right? Adopt policies on advertising in schools, including a prohibition on advertisements for products that do not meet the minimum nutrition standards or which are otherwise incompatible with educational mission of schools. So no no smoking, no booze. My curiosity around that one is whether the dis I wasn't there but this is just what comes to me. Did that discussion intersect with anything going on with the department of health and human services federally right now?

I can understand that justification. For me though I I see it and I liked it before the edit better. Um, so, so now it would say adopt policies on advertising especially for products that do not meet the nutritional standards incompatible.

Yeah, I'm pretty sure their sample policy u that we I think reviewed a year or two ago um speaks about pro prohibiting ad um advertising.

Yeah. So it is it is you you are right.

It's a we it is a little weird because it is it is it is pulling back because it was like so for example if like if that had been the language before we adopted our policy we might you see what I mean like we might have been like oh okay like we're just going to make sure like we're going to allow some advertise you know or whatever it is but which we do which we do but the prohibition yeah I don't know it's I I agree I think it's an odd I think it's an odd pullback back. Yeah.

Make you wonder about the rationale like is there a situation where you would allow right this kind of advertising in our schools?

I mean, I guess I can give you an example that I'm pretty sure is out on our track right now is like when we have our sports teams that um have like a a a sponsor banner and Main Beer Company likes to donate to things in the community.

I mean, would that should be prohibited or I think me and Beer Company has a self-proc.

Um but but that's an example of you know like a community member you know um or Pepsi or Coca-Cola with your sports signs your um Right. So that I mean that one actually was an actual uh event here when we need to replace in the gym we replace the scoreboard um and those companies will donate the scoreboard if you have some like a name on it. So, I think ours says Power Aid instead of Coke because we have a policy.

I I just I wonder if you mentioned local control and I I I wonder if because they added that to if this revision was keeping in mind what local communities might be inclined to do if minimum nutrition standards nationally change. if the definition of that changes in a dramatic way.

But I mean the also thing to thing to remember is these are just the resolutions, right? I mean these are not rules. These are not things we live by or we're required to or policies we have to adopt. I mean this is just kind of what the MSBA uses as their guidelines.

Yeah, I might I might make a a rare um uh suggestion that we suggest that we no that just that I think we're talking about this a little long.

Um and again, just so that's on the record, I have said that once in his life.

Um again, I think it is important, but I think we're I think the issues we're getting into here are like I think we're really talking about like how how do we feel about it in terms of how it impacts our district, and that's not really what this is about. Right. Yeah.

Yeah. So I mean I I don't think I can still ask right like the rationale it would be useful for us. Yeah. Yeah.

Yeah.

Um any other comments on the edits?

Okay. The wreath rights are more substantial.

Um did they have any kind of highlights on that section?

So there was one discussion that happened on these um maybe more. Um so the first the one that there was something else added. Folks asked questions about 2B1i on the bottom of page five.

Um, I'll just give you a minute to read it. Um, it is actually. Yeah, let's talk about that for like an hour. That's my new proposal.

Yeah, that one's super interesting.

That's a that's a really Yeah, they provided just additional information that So, the question was like why did you why did you delete the last sentence?

Um, and they thought there was ambiguity around which documents and who are they to say like which values which documents. So it was meant to give some suggestions but also allow free like suggest freedom of choice for what those identifying your own values.

Yeah. US foundation documents. I'm not sure what that means. Is that like the declaration of independence or that's essentially why it was deleted. Okay.

Y because my first thought was like foundations that do work around this like do they have documents? But yeah.

So like our foundational documents as a country. I see.

Yeah, cuz like is the bill of rights is that values? Like those are rights, not but they come from what we feel is valuable.

Yeah. I don't know.

I like it. I think it's cool. Let's keep those in there.

Guess it pulled out that and added some more specific ones like respect, compassion. So, not necessarily Okay.

Yeah. essentially like US Foundation documents could be interpreted a lot of ways to a lot of people and so um it's clear which values they're suggesting.

Well, I have a quick question. Sorry, Colin.

No, no. I just just some clarification because I think you can read into it a couple different ways, but two 2 A4 is that an O I guess 4 the email stuff.

I mean it says schoolboard business may not be conducted via email.

So So how how specific is that? Right. So I can't say thanks Tom for the update. I have an additional question I want you to look into. You can do that, but what what you can't there is kind of a concrete limit. If you get enough board members chiming in on a conversation that you reach a quarum, then you've had a meeting outside the meeting. So, you you just have to be mindful of that.

It's just a weird sentence in my opinion because it's so vague. I mean, it is vague, but I think it's specifically um yeah, I I think once you're having conversation, like back and forth conversation with multiple people weighing in on opinions about things that probably should be done in public. It's one thing to say like, "Hey, found this interesting article. Thought the board might appreciate it." That's not a conversation. That's just providing some information. But if you're like, "Yeah, you know what I thought was really interesting was the fourth paragraph." You're like, "No, no, no. that was that's you know that's when you start getting into a conversation and that's conducting business outside of a meeting. Um and I I try to make sure that we don't do that.

You're very good at doing that. Michelle very mean. I know that's not what I said. Uh I have a question about uh the first one. It's actually um and my previous comment still stands. I don't want to talk about this forever, but I just I just don't I just don't understand that one from a I mean, I understand what the words say, but um the board teacher relations one.

Yeah. Like fully supports the statuto meet and consult requirements contained within teacher contracts regarding proposed education policy changes uh while like while maintaining board authority to make changes to education policy. I don't know. I guess I understand it. I just I don't understand why that's a issue or like why is it Um, I think it's probably I it's a good question. Um, my guess is they were consolidating two specific resolutions into one. Um, and uh because it's completely eliminating because that first one exists, right? And they're just adding to it but eliminating the next one. Um, you know, one of the one of the things that we're always trying to be cognizant of when we're um reviewing and negotiating new contract is to make sure we're not adding educational policy to contracts because it doesn't belong there. Educational policy is the is the um the purview of the board and the administration, not the not the union. Um so um but certain things um dictate us to have this meet and consult, right? That is a you'll find that in our contract several places like um we're happy to have a conversation with the union and explain why we're doing what we're doing but this is if it is educational policy it is not grievable. It is not something that can be you know brought to the brought to the board to say like we disagree with this um that is the board's um the board's right. So I think this is just sort of confirming like yes we we are fully supportive of the meet and consult requirements um while still understanding that we maintain uh let's see we talked about emails facilities so this is another one that looks like it's it's not well is it really replacing that I don't even Know I'm confused when it says it's replacing one with the same numbers as what it says, but it's not all new. Do you know how that works?

Yeah.

And then the new one if it's not in red was a part of the previous one.

Okay. Okay. So instead of like underlining capital, they're just saying they're just restating it but highlighting the changes.

Okay. Okay. Administrator. Okay.

Yeah. Um on 2B 5B learning support, the last sentence is funding should be provided to support implementation.

And I'm wondering where that funding is coming from or what they're recommending if it's if the DOE is to provide that funding or if the district should be providing that funding.

Usually the recommendation is not the district.

Um so yeah the previous sentence is the DOE needs to identify existing resources um appropriate measurement tools and share effective interventions.

funding should be provided to support implementation. So my assumption is that DOE provides the funding.

Yeah. So there's a common thread through a lot of their resolutions of avoiding unfunded mandates, right? So the state will say you have to do this and you're like, well, you're going to help us pay for that. No, we're not. So like trying to avoid those things.

Yeah. So the previous policy, the last sentence was consider consideration of appropriate funding provided by the main department of education is also recommended.

So it's a change to funding funding should be provided to support implementation from that.

Not sure what that which is funny because it's actually even more vague like before at least it said it was coming from the DOE or like they would consider it. I guess that it's part of it is vague, right? Like so appropriate consideration of appropriate is recommended like they should at least think about giving us the money. Uh now they're saying they should give us the money but not telling us who they is.

So maybe that's a recommended change like the department of it should be providing funds to support implementation.

It's fun to try and read what this was before. So, MSBA continues to oppose mandatory merging of school administrative units. Did that mean it previously said MSBA mandatory merging?

I don't understand. Maybe just the continues uh technology.

Yep.

um 3B 2C talking about on page eight, maximizing federal and state assistance through economically disadvantaged rates. Um they talk about continuing to use best available poverty data.

Um and accurate identification through available and acceptable methods is essential. I'm just wondering if if this is about relying on other data than the free and reduced lunch forms that parents no longer have to fill out.

Yeah, I think that's why this is being considered.

Okay. And I guess I'm just curious what the other data they're talking about. Okay.

They just don't refer to th those forms at all. Or do they? But I'm not understand.

Okay. Just want to make sure I was understanding that. But if you have more my guess is that's why they're trying to capture that because they don't have to fill out those forms anymore.

I'm itching back there because they don't fund MTSS to begin with. That was a couple items back. So that was I was like um so the SCES forms have now um it's gone to an identification of household income as opposed to the former system of having like requesting that access to free andor reduced lunch depending on the number of children in the household and the and the economics of the household. Um so we've had to do that. we've we defer to the SCES like that baseline indicator but the state has been exploring other ways to capture that information without any of the ask um and it's a very tricky path for them to try to navigate an alternative because the information is not readily available so they I my understanding is they haven't made any progress that's what I know about that I I logged in today to power school just, you know, for fun. And um cuz I like to torture my son. But anyways, um it did ask it popped up right away and it asked if we met it outlined um incomes above and asked if my son met any of those and it was a simple yes or no.

Um I mean obviously I hit no, but so I guess that's another way to track some of that data, right? If people are actually filling that out. Yeah.

Yeah. That's how we track it right now.

Um, we happen to believe we're not properly capturing the need.

Yeah, I think that, you know, I imagine that is well, I don't imagine. I know um that that even with the forms, I think most districts under under count because people don't fill it out.

Yeah. So, um, while free food in schools I think is absolutely fantastic, that is sort of one of those unintended consequences that I'm not sure people thought about ahead of time as to what it might mean without having to capture that data anymore.

So um so are we okay on um no questions on that one then from the board?

Yeah I think so.

I uh I appreciate the change in that next one around vouchers and you know diluting the power of public education in the 3B 3G.

So um the probationary period one did they talk about that?

Yeah, they're they know that the stat the current statute says two, but they're um suggesting that they their opinion is that it should go back to three.

They didn't give any additional information other than that. Yeah. And I would say that's a good move.

Yeah. Yeah. Interesting.

Um, professional development to support student achievements.

Move to section four.

Are there different sections of the resolution? Is that I'm just trying to figure out why that one's in blue around the charter school one.

It's just like their their little directory of like moving to different categories. Okay.

Um did they talk about the charter school one at all around what drove that? No.

I mean, it seems like the last time it was touched was before the charter schools were in place, so it would make sense that they would have some updates, but that's interesting.

Uh, unfunded retirement costs, not a surprise.

um the superintendent agreement one.

Yeah. The intention there they shared was that they support and suggest superintendents decide on it annually so that it's not just a oneanddone decision that they're revisiting it every every year.

Well, it already has to be done every year. I wonder if uh I I I wonder if the intention of this is to remove the state's role in the appeal process even more. Yeah, this is 4.8.

Yes. Sorry. Page 11.

I was wondering if there was ever a legislative review or commission to create the criteria. Did that that's what they're I'm not sure. or I mean really the the criteria that's in statute to the best of my memory is that it's just supposed to be what is demonstrated to be in the child's best interest.

Um with with that said, you know, either superintendent can put the cabage on it, but then they bring it to the department, the main DOE, and they can override, right? Which they often do.

Yes.

So, basically they're just saying it should rest with the two superintendents making the decision. That's the way I'm reading it. Yeah.

Okay. And then, yeah, there was some stuff around the construction one.

Yeah. Well, I just reread um quote unquote, "We support superintendent deciding on this." So yes, Tom, to your point, um yeah, so this one, this one I just um it to me it it puts um our the proposed regulation about taxes.

I think that they it gives you a little bit more transparency into their thought process around school funding. Um, yeah. I mean, the current, what's it called? The thing where you send them pictures of how bad your school is and you get on the get in the lottery.

Oh, yeah. It's the lot. The lottery. It's basically what it is, right? It literally that is what it is. Yeah.

I mean, I think um this seems different though, right? Like what they're replacing seems like a different thing that they're than they're talking about in the new one.

Yeah, it's different. But I I to me it um my point of connecting it is that uh it gives you language around where funding for some of these projects should come from. Yeah. Right. Yeah.

Where they where they think the source of funding needs to be coming from.

What I find interesting is the second bullet.

Alter the project approval process so that smaller projects can move forward as well as massive building replacements.

the the trap that schools can districts can fall into is that you let's say you have this you know ailing building and you're far down the list. So that leaves you with this impossible choice of well if we put money into this building to refer to repair something that or upgrade it in some way that we really need we're then shooting ourselves in the foot because we're going to go down the list.

So that that seems to be a remedy for that.

Except then the last bullet is to incentivize districts to to put money into the building so that you don't have to get replaced. It's just kind of what are you going to give? Can we get some money for that?

Right. Right.

I mean what's interesting to me is like this is I don't I don't know this is about the major capital school construction program. Right. Mhm.

Um I mean I understand the dilemma of you know do we just chip away at this in big chunks and replace the whole big schools that need it or you know what we replaced was basically a fund what the recommendation for a fund of to fund small projects across across the state.

I don't know.

Clearly that one didn't work. So we're going to move on to this one. but improve transparency and predictability in the funding process by extricating construction funding from the EPS formula.

Yeah, because it I mean it is in there now, right? So we the state funded school in Durham that's a whole separate item in in our EPS uh ED279.

I mean, just on that one, I I wonder whether there is um matching legislation to this one because it's so specific.

Yeah, maybe.

Um like it seems it seems pretty granular, you know, to be like these very particular things which maybe might want to meet you might want to have in the bill. Like it seems like I don't know, right?

Seems like somebody's got a plan.

Yeah. To Steph's point, that first one was like we want fair tax policy. And what do we mean by that? We mean a main Yeah.

this one.

Exactly. There's So, there's two bills that they're expecting will have um more resolution. I guess I'm bad with terms um about the EPS formula and then also the school construction. So, they're considering bills in the legislature now about those two things.

So, I think that's where this this one came from. Yeah.

Okay. So, so I I I'm I'm hearing that we didn't have any we were a hard no to. We had a couple of maybe clarification or recommendations or maybe even strengthening a few, but none that we've felt strongly you should oppose. Is that a fair assessment of our conversation? That according to Colin went way too long. Okay. Do you have what you need, Steph?

Yes. and I'll try to get answers for some of the other ones for our own continued conversation.

Um, anything about the change in the bylaws we should think about cuz I saw that was in here too. Those are mostly like consistency. Okay.

Um, or clarification. And then there was a few on like what they can do in an emergency situation with replacing members or with needing an emergency vote on a policy. Emails. I see that.

Yeah. So that was that was it. It was all mostly like consistency. Okay.

And then this is just the minutes of last year's meeting. Okay.

That's the current copy of the resolutions as they as they stand. Okay. Yeah.

All right. Any other comments around the MSBA delegate assembly other than big thanks to Steph for doing it?

All right, Colin. Colin, it was very interesting. So, your suggestion was correct.

All right, so we don't have any personnel items. Oh, look, we're back to public comment. Anyone arrive?

No. All right. So then I would take a motion for consideration and approval to enter into executive session as outlined in one MRSA section 4056A for the purpose of discussing the superintendent's evaluation.

Cara and Colin. Thank you. All those in favor?

Great. No one opposed. So we will take a quick break um so that they can break down and go. Um did they tell you where they wanted us to go? Yeah. Across the hall. Across the hall. Okay, great. Yeah.

============================================================

RSU5 BOARD OF DIRECTORS MEETING TRANSCRIPT
Meeting Date: September 24, 2025
Source File: transcript_2025-09-24_O9rwZbpMQjE.txt
District: Regional School Unit 5 (Freeport, Durham, Pownal, Maine)
============================================================

and justice for all.

Okay. Do I have a motion for consideration and approval of the minutes from the September 10th, 2025 meeting as presented, barring any errors or omissions? Danielle, thank you.

Valerie, thank you. Oh, and there's M. Great.

All right. Uh there's a motion and a second. Uh any discussion? All those in favor?

Great. None opposed.

I don't believe there are any adjustments to the agenda this evening. Correct. Nope.

So, we will move on to item six, which is good news and recognition. And we will welcome uh Moon back as our board rep this evening.

and take it away.

All right. Um I guess it's kind of been a very short I guess kind of start to for the school year. So not a ton has been happening, but I guess so far um at the Southern Main Classic for cross country, the girls won and the boys were on a rough. So that was very good. The the boys and girls team and then uh tomorrow actually the student leadership group from high school is going on a field trip uh down to Portland to meet with other student leaders like leadership groups from Portland and Bangor. That's pretty cool. And then I guess right now we're kind of in the heat of um college and so for the junior class we have opportunities to meet college representatives. So we're getting seeing schools in like University of Rhode Island and Southern Maine and so it's just learning about the opportunities that they provide which is really cool so far. And then we also have scholarship opportunities like the Coca-Cola scholarship program. And so it's definitely quite cool to and I guess kind of scary change I guess almost but it's pretty cool.

And then lastly um tonight in honor of Theo Ber's life and raising awareness around mental health the boys soccer team will be holding a moment silence at today's game against Gley.

I actually just got a picture from the girls team. So the girls are also playing Gley and um my understanding is is that the active minds clubs in both schools got together and did something at both schools which I thought was wonderful for for Theo and his family and and the senior class. So all right, thank you Moon. Uh we will move on to public comment.

Going to go out on a limb here and say I think we don't have any public comment yet, but you never know. We do have another opportunity at the end of the agenda. So we will uh move on to item eight which is report from the superintendent.

Good evening everybody. Can you hear me?

Okay. Um so as I begin tonight, first thing I'd like to do is acknowledge my predecessor Jean Sarapa who will be finishing up with RC5 by the end of the month which is not that far away. Um, Jean has been incredibly gracious to me in setting me up to be successful here.

She's been giving me advice. She's been giving me support. Um, she's been giving me her time and her presence. And she has been steadfast, thoughtful. Um, I can't express my appreciation deeply enough, and I'm sure I speak for many people here. So, Jean, you're listening.

Thank you. Um I next thing I wanted to talk about are some new expenses that are coming up in SPE that are not coming up that are here with us right now in special education and I want to make sure that the board is aware of these.

We are paying for these right now through reserve accounts. Um these are based on specific student IEP needs and increased case loads. Um we have had to take on a teacher of the deaf and that's four or five hours a week.

We're also um paying for uh 30 hours of speech language pathology and this is due to increased student case.

that is in addition to a one-to-one nurse that we are we had the board had approved the position to be hired but we did not have a candidate so we've had to contract for that service.

Um so in total that's $247,200 that we're spending from the reserve account to meet these needs. And these again are for student needs. And these students we presume will be here with us for quite a while. And so as we look ahead to next year's budget, we'll have to take those needs into account and budget.

Um I want to take a few moments to set the stage for um Assistant Superintendent Museo to talk about the transition to assume responsibility for providing special education services for early childhood that will become every district's responsibility by 2028.

So, as you know, that also includes us.

And what that means is beginning at age three, school districts are going to have to assume responsibility for providing child find and free appropriate public education or faith for 3 to 5 year olds. Right now, that responsibility does not begin until age five. It's going to have to include three and four year olds by 2028.

So, That intersects, of course, with the prek structure that we already have. We do already have prek for foury olds. Um, as you know, we have half day sessions in each of our elementary schools that go down that far in grade level. Um, I am told that thinking behind the half day structure originally was that it would serve twice as many kids potentially. Um we have reason to believe however that actually the half day structure may present a lot of barriers to families who really need full day because of their family lives. So and it also has implications for this new responsibility that I mentioned to provide special education services for three and four year olds. And I wanted to give an example of that. So hypothetically, suppose that a three-year-old came to our attention who lives in the district who may have delays in language and social emotional development. This is not an uncommon scenario.

So if that student for whom we are now obligated to provide special education services were in a half-day program, that half-day program might have about two and a half hours worth of instruction in it, but it also has snack and it has nap time and it has transitions. And if you have to add into that speech and language services or any other services, it's really hard to make all of that fit. And Some children to have their needs met will need to be in the least restrictive environment possible which may mean with a group of neurotypical peers. So there are lots of pieces to this responsibility that we will have to figure out over time. A full day setting which we don't currently have may provide longer and more consistent exposure to peers for practicing social skills or communication. um it might have more time for embedded therapies um and it might just be for some children a more developmentally appropriate case.

So um as I mentioned this is a state mandate for all districts to assume this responsibility by 2028 at the latest.

Some districts have stepped into that responsibility earlier than others. Um there have been districts in York and Kery that have already stepped into this early. Um we can take a look at what other districts have done and learn some lessons from that. Some of the things as we look at that that we're seeing is that this is a huge responsibility for districts. It's something new and it takes dedicated leadership. So we will need to think about how to set up a leadership structure in our district as we assume that responsibility. We need going to need to think about the funding for this and where it comes from over time. As you will hear in greater detail tonight from Erica, um in the beginning, the state offers support for a lot of things, but over time that state support dwindles and it becomes our responsibility.

Um and we need to figure out how we can be flexible to meet the needs of the kids and have this be integrated into our overall system in the most seamless way possible.

Um we have decision points to make about when we join a cohort of districts that are implementing this. Um we have two op we have two options next year or the year after and by that time we're at 2028 and we would need to have started the work and be fully into it. Um for me as I look at this right now there's some important next steps that I want to bring to your attention. We are very much in the conceptual stage of this. I think my first step now is to bring this formally to the board as we are tonight to make sure that it's on your radar. We have a lot of decisions to make over the next couple of years. Um you may remember a conversation I had with you um just before I started work here about how data should provoke questions. So some of the questions that come to my mind as we look at this are how will we make this work with our facilities?

I don't know the answer to that yet. I I don't suspect anybody does. We need to take a really good hard look at how our facilities could work and be adapted to meet this need. Um I would suggest that that calls for a facilities study. So that's one of the things we'll have to dig into over time.

I still need more information about exactly what costs the state will cover and when that funding sort of tapers off. We have I have a big picture understanding of that now but we are digging into this and we want to give you better answers for that. Um and I also want to lean into what other districts have done around this and gain from their experience and grow our wisdom from that. Um I believe we will need to form a whatever road we take we'll need a dedicated stakeholder group that will be able to weigh these options and make recommendations to you. Um, and I also would like to give you an opportunity, multiple opportunities, but one starting tonight to pose your own questions and to keep coming back to us for more information. So, this is a heavy lift for the district. It is a very big it's a it's a very big responsibility that we have to take on.

Um, but the good news is that we do have time to do it in a thoughtful way. So, for the moment, I'm going to pause before I leave this topic, and I'd like to ask, what questions do you have right now? I may not be able to answer them right now, but I'll take them in parking lot format, and we can certainly make a point to circle back to them.

I'm wondering if it makes sense to hear the other presentation just so we don't preempt uh questions that are going to be answered just because we haven't we didn't have this uh to review ahead of time to know what's coming. Um I mean unless people have really high level questions.

I guess the only question I had is from the math around how many years we have to do this because my understanding is we have to be doing it by July 128. So we have we could start in July 126, we could start in July 127, or we could start in July 128. So there's sort of three start dates, right?

Not that I'm advocating to push it out to the very last minute, but that is an option. Those are there are different levels at which we can step into the work. Um there are lots of complexities to it. Um Erica has a presentation tonight that will answer that in more specific detail. Um but that is something we will have to figure out is there's different levels to step into it which is the most advantageous for us.

Right.

I guess I'll say that the invitation for questions is not a momentary one. It's an ongoing one.

If you don't ask now you don't get to ask. So I think there are going to be a lot of questions and I'm asking a lot of questions right now. So, we are in the phase of educating ourselves and we we all need to do it purposefully now because it's time to it's time to think about what we're going to do and get this done.

Um, I wanted to say a bit about the budget engagement process. So, as I'd mentioned to you, I have taken an approach this year to make sure that staff voices are heard in um shaping the priorities for next year's budget. Um the first step in that process was to email staff with an overall picture of some of the factors we know about the budget. IC the board on that email so you saw what they saw. Anecdotally the feedback to me on that letter has been very positive. Um people have appreciated the sense of understanding it gives them about the environment that we're working in. Um, with respect to the budget, I've asked administrators to provide me with a summary of their existing practices for soliciting the voices of their staff and we'll be presenting that to you in a summarized way so that you have um knowledge of what that is. We have engaged in listening sessions with the staff, but those are ongoing now. Um, so far I've met with uh I've met with a group at the high school. I've met with a group at Mor Street School and I've met with the tech team and I have more of those meetings scheduled over the next few weeks and it certainly has been really good conversation and interesting to hear what the staff members have to say.

I've definitely gained some insights from those conversations.

After that, I'm also going to be putting out a district-wide survey that has basically the same conversation points that the um listening sessions are framed around so that staff members who don't have an opportunity to attend those can weigh in. And when all of that feedback is gained, uh I'm going to make sure that it's summarized and put out in a transparent way so that everyone, both the board and the staff and the administrators and the community can see what the themes and the feedback are.

I don't know where any of that goes in terms of putting the budget together. Um, but I'm glad to at least have conversations going around that.

Um, I wanted to talk about strategic planning. So, as you know, our strategic planning process is also moving forward.

We've partnered with the great schools partnership. Um, right now we are in the phase of gathering community feedback about our strategic plan. Um, I thought I would take a minute to just repeat what that's about. We are at the stage of envisioning what our graduates will think, know, understand, and be able to do. We're developing the vision of a graduate. And that is the backwards planning point from which we would think about everything else that goes into the strategic plan, whether it's what we do with our buildings, what we do with our curriculum, what we do with our professional development, and on and on and on. So, we have begun community listening sessions. We had the first one on Monday night at Palville. There were, I think, 14, 15ish participants from the community. Really rich conversations. We have another one coming up this Thursday night at 6 o'clock at Durham Community School. We have one this coming Saturday at 10 a.m. at the Freeport Community Library. And we have one at Freeport High School on Tuesday the 30th at 6 PM.

These listening sessions are for anyone who lives in the community and you can go to more than one. You don't have to live in Durham to go to the one in Durham. You don't have to live in Freeport to go to the ones in Freeport.

Um the purpose and the hope is that they will be as inclusive and widely attended as possible.

So please, if you're listening, I hope you'll make it a point to be involved in the process. And there is also a survey available on our website through which you can enter your feedback. Um, I wanted to just close these remarks by saying that I am continuing to try to be visible in the schools. I had a really entertaining day in Durham Community School today when I was serving lunch and standing next to Mr. Pitten and many of the kids felt had their minds blown by looking at me and Mr. Pitten right next to each other and I had several comments saying, "Are you Mr. Pittton's father?" And at one point I did say grab the microphone and introduce myself to seventh and eighth grade and said yes hello. I'm Tom Pittton. I'm Mr.

Pittton's little brother. And there was a reaction. Was it from Will? There was a reaction from Will as well.

There were also some comments that we like the parent trap. The movie The Parent Trap with the American Twin and the British twin. Anyway, it was it was good fun. Um I love I love seeing kids.

I got to see every kid in Durham Community School today by serving lunch.

So that was super um you Thank you.

Thank you.

So um the budget process comment about the um districtwide survey that's for staff. Yes.

You said there after the listening it would be a districtwide survey. It's a staff survey. Okay, great. Just confirmed. Thank you.

All right. So, we will move on uh to item nine, administrator reports. We will start with uh finance with Good evening. Uh included in your packet uh is our first look at the um revenues and expenditures spending for the July 1 through August 31 uh time frame. Right now uh we are about um 15.8% collected.

Um I just want for those new board members, we actually collect our town assessments on a monthly basis. So um we take the full amount that the um when you look at the budget documents, there's an amount that each um each of the member communities actually pays, but they have it's spread over a 12-month period. Um and uh state subsidy also comes in on a monthly basis.

Uh and then our expenditures um our expenditures on this report it gives you uh a year-to-ate column which is actually funds that have been paid out.

Um and then an encumbrance column. And the encumbrance column largely is mostly salaries and benefits that we're anticipating paying over the um the school year. Uh not to get too far in the weeds, but um a teacher contract runs from September to August. And so this number is is inclusive and why you see it seems lower on the year-to date numbers. Um because annually we acrew teachers salaries that we pay over the summer. So we record that expense in June. Um and then in the months of July and August we pay out those salaries for the teachers. Um but the so the incumbrance column includes that full 12-month period um which will get paid out in July and August. Um but for accounting purposes we recorded as of June 30. So um we're not under spending at this point. We're kind of on track for where we always have been um because really we're only paying um year round staff that um in that year-to- date column. A lot of the ordering um is done in the month of of August. So when we see September's that's when you'll see that we've paid for the maj majority of the supplies and stuff that have come in um in order in the preparation for school. Um so this is just an early look. Right now we are um expended and encumbered about 81.3%.

And there are no areas of concern at this time. One thing I will mention on here is that um different from previous years, the capital projects fund is actually um we voted to to work on some of the life safety items in that bucket.

Um and so that's um that that that project is working. The majority of that has been expended. Um um but it all has been encumbered. So it is the full that full amount is reflected in that number there.

As far as the local budget goes questions for Thank you.

Do we want to jump back to support staff hires?

Yes. Sorry, I neglected to mention that we did have hired some support staff. We've hired Peggy Hmel as a bus driver, Christine Lions as a Freeport Middle School edtech, Alyssa Hurling at Durham Community School as a point 4 edtech, and Julia Julia Gchall at Durham Community School as a 6 edte.

Thank you. Love to see bus driver and edtech positions getting filled. That's wonderful. Preach.

All right. So, we are going to move on to our update on the More Street School and goal review with principal uh Julie Anderson.

Good evening. So, I'm super excited to be here and present these goals um tonight because I'm super proud of the work our team has done this year. We t like as you can see in the review we tackled a lot and we accomplished it all which there is I don't think there's been another time that I've been able to come here and say that there's often been distractions that have um and sent us in different directions but you know we really focused hard and kind of worked together especially our leadership team um around leading PLC's to to achieve our goals really. So um I'm going to walk you through the goals we set last year because we've set a foundation for work will continue this year. So um data points change but the goals effectively stay the same and there are some places where we'll be lifting that work this year but primarily the goals and the action steps will stay pretty similar. But I thought it might be worth just kind of anecdotally talking through how impactful the the strategies we implemented have been. So that first goal around reducing our chronic absenteeism, we were hoping to get to less than 10%.

Um having seen an increase over time, particularly after COVID, and we got down to 7.2%.

And that was um largely due to a very um intentional effort to communicate hard with parents about how important it is that children are at school. Um we were very clear on what kinds of things would be approved and not approved and when we um you know we have clarity around if you've already had a 5day vacation and you're asking for another one you're not going to get that approved the second time which probably means that our truency numbers have increased because um five consecutive days unexcused absences or seven days in total that are unexcused used meets the truency criteria. We definitely had families with children who had were having a second vacation that wasn't approved that would then mean that they've hit those numbers. So, there's definitely some continued work to do, but I think we've started that strong education for parents about what is and isn't important. And you know, the research and data supports early habits being strong for longerterm success for um students as they start to make their own decisions about being at school or not.

Um one of the things that I think definitely like we would like to see that 7.2% reduced next year and even further, but the reality is when you have small children whose first experience are at school, there are illnesses that are just inevitable. And so it'll be interesting to see how um whether we can continue to reduce that.

There was certainly a period of time where there was a lot of sickness going around and it was just hard to kind of keep kids at school. Um but I definitely feel like you know there's been a change. We've we are connecting with families sooner. we are like alerting um families that they're they're approaching the chronic absenteeism um rate and how impactful that is on learning.

Can I just ask you a quick question just because we have we do have new board members. Could you give us the definition of what is product absentee is it?

Yeah. So I'm looking So Amanda Mazda, our assistant principal is sitting out here and she actually owns like the attendance um tracking and data 10% 10%. So missing 10% of day. So right. Yeah. So right now with such few days of school, it doesn't take much for you to hit that criteria. If you've had two days out, you're getting close to kind of hitting that criteria already. So monthly families are getting communication, hey, your child's already hit 10%. And if children have a high percentage of absences due to sickness or whatever, and then there's a planned absence request coming in, it might get denied. Um the other part to our attendance goal was so that like really thinking about increasing our ways families can engage which leads into our second goal. Um just so that families feel better connected to the work we're doing and how important and what they it is and what they may or may not value.

So that was kind of dovetailed into our second goal which was to increase our family engagement opportunities. The data point I used was the um the board's parent satisfaction survey which isn't sent every year. So it's hard to kind of see whether we've made gains um with that data point. And if you for those who were here last year, we had a pretty high level of satisfaction, but there were comments um from families that really were looking to engage more. And what we reflected on was kind of postco we hadn't returned to ways to bring families back into school. So this year we went at it with gusto and um we committed to um a grade level opportunity every trimester and also other like support staff offering different things and ways for families to connect. So our goal was to offer a wide array and then hopefully catch different um types of families, different needs that families have. So, our care team, we're offering just a very casual conversation during the day to just have parents who want to come in and just chat about how hard it is to raise children today and just things they might be puzzling with that we can either support or just facilitate a discussion where other parents are feeling may or may not be feeling the same way. What ended up happening with that group, which was pretty cool, was new people to Freeport came to those. So they then were able to connect with each other and who knows what I know phone numbers were exchanged and you know different connections kind of happened and we we um led a couple of parent information uh more like education nights particularly around building resiliency executive functioning skills how to kind of support and pro promote those things at home which build um strong foundations to for independent learners which is what always our goal is. Um, and then as I said, each grade level opens their doors for a different experience or content where families could better understand the work we're doing in classrooms as well as come and kind of share that experience at school with their child. So, um, we had a lot of attendance. You know, there was just opportunities for families to come and experience a PE lesson, a library lesson, a STEM lesson, just to come and really be at school with their with their children. So you'll see in your packet kind of all of the things we offered across across the year and really that like so beforehand we were really only doing the kind of open house at the beginning of the year the parent conferences like things that would typically kind of anchor our communication with families.

The other part that dovetales with that is one of the one of the things we we've been really thinking about the types of information that teachers are communicating with families um so that we can better encourage fam families to support children because what we're learning a lot about is that repeated practice is super important for long-term gains and children holding their academic success. And so if families can engage in that practice at home, the likelihood of them carrying kind of benchmark scores they end up with across the summer and and sustaining for a really solid result is is much higher.

And the feedback suggested that those were definitely a place that um parents felt was super useful.

So then our um our third goal has been a consistent goal for us around kind of growing and increasing our data. Um, which is always what we're trying to do.

We want to get all of our students to um the expected benchmarks at the end of each year. And one things we we've really talked about as a team is, you know, not trying to prevent the gap from the get-go. The gap if you can close the gap in prek, you know, the the knock on doesn't doesn't happen. And um so we're really thinking about and what we've talked about and things you'll see in our data is sometimes we lose ground going into second grade. The complexity of learning in second grade is so much greater and we've had a lot of conversation at school this past year around you know we cannot le like second grade teachers have complex work to do already. We can't also have them have to catch up the ground that was lost prior.

So, we're building on lots of different things. Um, we're really thinking about keeping our expectations high for all learners. Um, and you know, once we believe children can, children believe they can too. So, it's it's really thinking about um reaching beyond like one thing we have talked a lot about particularly in reading and math. We have benchmarks to the end of the year in reading. But the reality is if you're not actually reading at that reading level in maybe February, you will not be solid at the end of the year. So we've we've really tried to kind of raise our expectations of where we hope children to be working and practicing which has had great results in particularly our reading data. Um, one of the other pieces that we did that is something we'll be building on more this year is, uh, we focused hard on our habits at work. One thing we had seen prior to doing this was a lot of kind of passive learning in terms of children kind of being entertained by their teacher in some ways. And so we focused refocused on habits of work and using fourstar rubrics. So essentially, you know, the goal is that three is kind of meeting the expectation. This is what it looks like to be an engaged learner. What is your job? And then um you know, you're going to be working towards four star if you can do it. So it's really a a system by which you co-create these rubrics with children and then they're leaning on it for goal setting like where are you now? Where do you hope to be? And how can you you know what how can I help you make that change? So, we did that across all of our habits of work in all of our classrooms, across settings. It was definitely a place that allowed all of our um teachers, no matter the content they teach, to kind of have this cohesive approach. And then our special educators adjusted that for their students. Um, and it was a definitely a place where we really kind of came together and now this year we're building on how we can use those rubrics in other ways to really think about cognitive engagement.

um our so these same practices were what supported um all of our instruction. One other key piece I want to highlight was we made a shift in kindergarten um to start the year. One of the things I think um I mentioned last year was we recognized that our prekers are not all leaving prek with all of the executive functioning and social emotional skills needed to then be successful in K. And so for the first six weeks of school in kindergarten where we are building stamina and started to establish routines, all of our kindergarten team have put a play work an extended play workshop into their day. And the the hope with that time is that children are learning about making a plan, playing together around the same topic, um taking roles, um thinking about what other materials they might need. And what we saw in this, so the idea is once children can do that, they will become stronger writers because the process of play mirrors the process of writing. You make a plan, you try it out, you revise it, and you um flow through the cycle again. And what we we have just moved kindergarten to first grade writers that we haven't seen before. They are so strong. They look like what we were getting in first grade and and we have a data point of one. So it's like hm was that a direct result? I think so, but we'll have to see as we continue to to have that practice. It certainly helped with early kind of social emotional things that um teachers can coach into as they think see things arise. So the model replicates the workshop that we do for literacy and math. So there is some foundational work that also is beneficial there. Um and then the teachers would think about a mini lesson depending on what they observe and then they'll they'll go to that uh station to play.

Um so our math data we managed to meet our goal in our reading data. So increase by 5% with our with our benchmark in both data points that I had highlighted. Our math data we did not but we did um grow in so many ways that maybe it's not reflected in this one math data point. We did a lot of PD around really thinking about growing our mathematicians as thinkers and thinking about how they use tools, how they can explain their thinking in a representational way. Um, and then be able to talk about what they're thinking in math in a way that kind of becomes transferable as they build their math skills and their fluency. Um, we'll continue that work this year. Math is definitely on the top of our our list.

Um, as we put a lot of our energy into literacy, we saw that growth last year.

Math will become front burner and continue that to deepen that work. We've already had a professional development day districtwide for pre-K2 math. And then there's another one upcoming pretty soon to kind of build on just deepening teachers understanding of the math progression at the early early grades.

Um okay. So the other part too that dovetales is um we have uh we continue our responsive classroom work which has been well established in our schools. Paul White has been a consultant who's been coming to coach our teachers. He's coming tomorrow. um we've added time across all the schools for him to specifically kind of come and coach in and in a kind of customized way so that we can respond to the needs in our schools.

So this year those goals all continue and um and if you look in 2526 I've highlighted in bold the kind of places that we're just lifting and adding under each of those goals. So um we under the attendance goal again we can we hope to reduce that but at least maintain it would be um hopeful and then we want to proactively increase our partnership with with families who have been identified as chronic absentes and sometimes when families got their communication there was some conflict around you know tension between us wanting kids at school and parents believing their kids shouldn't have been there for whatever reason. Um, so we're trying to like get ahead of that kind of thing and really just better understand what barriers might be and how we can better support that communication and connection. Um, and then Amanda will be attending the count in summit um, at the MPA and then hopefully so all the assistant principles are doing that. So hopefully there'll be some collaboration opportunities around that for us to think about some things differently um, if we haven't already been doing them.

um we'll continue our family connection work because we felt like it was so successful. One of the things that I recognized in the survey that we sent and the comments that um that we received was just in general there is a recognition that we're not going to please everybody like it's not going to suit everybody's schedule and we recognize that but I think continuing to offer lots of opportunity means that we're going to satisfy many um people across the across the board so that hopefully um we need to engage lots of people. Um, the other thing that that we're thinking about and exploring is just different ways to engage parents as part of our team in decision- making ways. So, we haven't really kind of dug into this yet, but it's a curiosity that we want to explore and just, you know, we've had um parents engage in interview teams sometimes, but not all the time.

We've had parents engage in certain things like as we um it's a while ago now, but as we developed the playground, parents were very much involved in that process and things. Um but we're just going to explore ways that we can kind of bring parents to the table versus just engaging with it on with their students.

Um and then the other things are in the data uh in the academic data ones is just expanding on and continuing the work we've already done. Um and and you'll see a thread where it's kind of specific to increase math within that.

The professional development is focused there and um and then we're building on those fourstar rubrics that I had already talked about. Our PLC's have been phenomenal. So that's our professional learning communities where our teams meet weekly to really just focus on instruction and student learning and um there's this leans on Hadtie's research which is actually the foundation for all of this work and um really thinking about knowing that impact. So at those meetings, teachers are bringing either student work to analyze and um collaborate around or they might be bringing a puzzle or practice where, you know, they're not sure about something and a colleague might help. Um they might bring a video of something of themselves teaching for feedback from their colleagues. um they might plan together and really unpack things really thinking with a lens of you know our our learners who might need to grow more than a year which is always a challenge. Um so that that's kind of work that our PLC's will be deepening and um we've already started we had our team leaders observe each other to kind of grow their practice across our school. Um, and then the other place we're focusing is really thinking about as we're getting much closer with our data to the 80%. So effective tier one instruction is should grow 80% of our kiddos or more hopeful. Um, and we're getting closer to that mark. And so we're thinking about ways to dig a little deeper into the students who struggle or are further behind need to grow more than a year in a year. So, how are we setting goals that feel realistic to make that extra accelerated movement for those students? So, those are the kind of ways we're focusing and hoping to grow um more of our learners questions for me.

Our high school parents allowed to come to the K2 about how it's hard to be a parent.

[Laughter] Thank you, Julie. Um questions for Julie. It's a lot.

I was just curious um if there's any any studies on like a root cause analysis of the parents who are um creating chronic absenteeism, if there's some sort of rubric to try to determine if if it's common reasons or if there's any way we can meet the families where they are. If there's like I'm just speaking as somebody who works an hourly job. um sometimes it's hard to get that vacation time during school vacation and so you're getting that vacation time in off peak hours because everybody wants those weeks. So I'm just wondering if there's been any um studies on if that's the reason or if there any other reasons what we could do to try to meet those where they are. um we haven't done necessarily what a deep analysis but there's definitely p there's some patterns like I said like your first vacation won't get approved like we acknowledge that that there are some families who that's the only time they can they can go and take it but your second one maybe could do you know we'll we'll adjust and have those conversations uh there's a variety of patterns I I don't I think it shifts depending there's a lot of variables that that play in that's why We're just trying to think about different ways to connect and find out from individuals and our numbers are pretty are low way lower like our list is much smaller so it's easier to kind of engage at a more personal level with some of those families.

Can you remind us what the precoid numbers were for?

So I had a feeling you'd asked this and I was like I'm so I don't have time to go find that number. Um I think they were not that low. Not as low as 7.2%. Do you have it?

Yeah.

So, while she's looking that up, um my other question is is uh you mentioned that truency is probably gone up as a result of not necessarily approving both five day vacations. Um, so does it make sense to look at them sort of together to see are we just shifting people from chronic absenteeism to truency or I mean it sounds like we're not because you said the list is smaller. I presume regardless of which list you're on you're getting a phone call so we're not just shifting them back and forth but I'm just wondering if it makes sense to to truly grasp you know attendance.

Should we be looking at both those numbers?

Yes. So those both of those numbers are included when we talk about chronic absenteeism. Oh okay.

So the the reason why we I might kind of name truency as a separate thing is because it tends like that that's you know there's there's procedures and things around that that we need to follow and then that is also reported to the state.

Um so but it but uh where truent students are included in they're already in. Okay great. So we're not we're not not capturing some kids because they're in a different Yeah. And the trouble is too we might see improvement because once you hit that criteria for truency we're having a meeting we're doing things we might see change but they remain true whereas the chronic absenteeism is going to shift shift in and out depending on how many days of the year we've been at school.

So don't take a five day vacation in October as well. Yeah. I think she has your number.

1819 was 7.26%. Okay, so we're right back. Okay, that is that is huge improvement.

Like that's incredible. It feels good.

I mean, it's almost half, right? I mean 13 seconds changed to seven. Yes. Yeah, it felt great.

Yeah, congratulations on the improvement in the reading scores on the math number since I can tell you already. kind of dig in on what needs to happen to bring these scores up. And of course, one number, like you said, doesn't capture everything that's going on in the schools, but I'd like you to elaborate a little bit on what you think maybe led to the so that to the dip.

Yeah. To the dip. So that you're think you kind of understand where your thinking is about what's going to happen in the future.

Yeah. So I I I don't usually include our longitudinal data but I thought this kind of tells this answers this question. So if you if you look at that data that I included um you will notice so I often report out on school-based data and obviously we're digging into okay which cohorts are strongest who needs more support how are we growing different different um groups. But if you look at the math, which is on the second sheet, the smaller grid, because we've only been using this data point for three years, um we had a particularly strong first grade group transitioning into second for this year. And there are many variables as to whether you might maintain that. And it that second grade teaching team were pretty much all brand new.

um either new to teaching, new to the school, new to the grade level and so you know whilst we try and support and keep everything up and floating you know sometimes you can only keep so many things on your plate. So their leading data was strong that's kind of really where they lifted that as a team and like this year would be like that math that math growth. Now also you know we can think about that strong first grade group particularly and sometimes and I don't have the answer to this but as Tom said earlier data like promotes more questions um sometimes we are tracking particularly with our reading data and I'll be I haven't done this yet but it would be interesting to see like how many so this is a spring data point how many of that 95% stayed where they needed to be across the summer. So potentially, I do have the data. I just don't have it in front of me. But how many of those 95 kept that level of math coming back to the uh the new school year? I think it did dip. So, you know, it's not like we're trying to maintain 95, but they did they dipped. And and as I said before, second grade work is complex. There's a lot of pieces to it.

and and the if the foundation is not super strong, then it can it can shift there. But that that really seems to be that dip from first into second seems to be the the place where we lost those.

Thank you for congrats on reaching all those goals.

I love to see that you have utilized video and other observation strategies to provide peer feedback. Is there any other sort of mentoring opportunities for the teachers specific to math that they can take advantage of in district or out of district? Yeah. So we have um we have inschool strategists and now we used to have literacy and math strategies separate. Now we have instructional strategists. Um the decision for that was for many reasons.

One of which is um when you have new new teachers, they're getting feedback from a lot of people. So they're getting feedback from admin, they're getting feedback from their mentors. So they do have new to teaching, new to district have mentors. Um and then they're getting feedback from at that time a math strategist and a literacy strategist. So it's a lot of who who am I supposed to be pleasing today? Um so we kind of consolidated that support um into an instructional strategist. So that's kind of a mentorship too. We prioritize people in different ways for different reasons but um that's that's our our work. We know like generally primary teachers will lean literacy like that will be a favorite normally. And so we're trying to kind of really think about ways we may be giving inadvertent messages to kids about math without even thinking about it. So quiet time is a practice at our school and oftentimes the choices are read, rest or draw or write. So now we're like, "Oh, math needs to be a choice at that time too." Just like these, let's up the kind of um interest level and how we value math as a school and adults and and things like that. I know that's a small kind of piece, but those are the kinds of conversations we're having. So I feel like one of our goals also was about building collective efficacy. So that means you know teachers working together as a whole team sharing responsibility for all kids and you know celebrating that together and and I think that is something we've really strengthened. So when we think about mentors, teams of teachers are mentoring each other all the time. You know, we're trying to encourage, we have certain, you know, some people do it more than others, but there is a culture growing in our school of teachers just walking into each other's room and being okay with it. And um and we're valuing that and promoting that as something we are interested in.

And there's just conversations all the time happening around, you know, how we can do better.

Other questions for Julie? Thank you.

Thank you.

All right. So, we will move uh to our next administrator report. We have the CDS update which uh Tom alluded to.

Oh, yeah. So, the the uh the packet is in your purple folder cuz it wasn't uh it did. Yeah, exactly.

It's a new color scheme.

Yeah. Are you are you going to project up here? Yeah, I'll do that as well as um need to lower those lights just went out.

So, good evening everyone. I'm Erica Mateo, assistant superintendent. Um my colleagues Julie Nickerson and Ted Dalton will introduce themselves a little bit more later in the presentation, but as you requested in the last meeting, um we are sharing with you and per Tom's briefing earlier in his report, um some information regarding our necessary response to programming for early childhood education. So that's what we're presenting for you this evening. And I wanted to just start with kind of a purpose statement um for our work that we've dug into to this presentation um for you tonight. Presentations intended to briefly define what is required, outline our options to meet the requirements, and offer preliminary information about funding options involved in assuming this responsibility to identify and serve 3 to 5year-old students with special needs in 2028 from child development services. So, this is coming to us from CVS.

So just to paint a picture of where we currently are um we have three schools that support prek we have eight half day sessions. Um when four years ago I think now we will Lisa Demick and I came to the mic to ask for an early intervention team that was supported. So that means we currently are able to serve um students within our program who have IEPs. So, we have a special ed teacher, we have a speech and language therapist, we have an occupational therapist who solely work with our four-year-olds in our pre-K program. Um, and so currently the number is 12 who are serviced within our prek programs. Um, there are others who are being serviced maybe in their daycare setting. They have chosen not to come to prek and they're serviced generally by CVS and through a kind of consultant. um model like they will have an itinerant speech and language therapist going to to serve them or they might be in special purpose programming.

So we have 12 currently being served within the district and there are 14 served through CDS outside of our school and then two known students who have IEPs who are not getting service. Um, one of the one of the things um that I will also say is kind of that was primarily the reason we came to ask the early intervention team in the first place was because students were not getting service even within our schools.

So now we're able to do that. Um, and there are currently children in the community who are not not being served.

So we would take responsibility for that. Currently we are not responsible for any three-year-olds. We don't have three-year-olds in our program here at school. Um, so that is they are in the community and being serviced by CVS.

Um so just to offer you the mandate specifically I won't read the whole um legal section that comes after but to summarize on July 1st 2028 on July 1st 2028 uh RSU5 will be responsible for the identification and provision of special education services to learners age 3 to five which is not currently in our scope of responsibility. I'll give you a moment.

Okay. So, I'll introduce my colleague Ted and he can introduce himself in more detail regarding our options.

Hi, my name is Ted Dalton. I'm Erica said, I'm early childhood special education coordinator um couple other schools and I came here to roll sleeves with this team to look at what um we've done. Uh clearly there's some great things already happening free in addition to what Julie has already outlined. I think it's really important to know that we're doing a lot of work in in the middle of teaching it special work um working in the summers with the community getting kids just to know and families to know what's available. So there's a lot going on here. It's a great foundation. Um and there is like there are for all district. There's a big list for July 1st 28. It's a lot in there. Um and there's a few for next year. There's a few paths, a few options for people in districts um to to use to get to um uh your goal, which is, you know, you want the wheels on the bus to get rolling July 1st, 2028. Um there's some ways to build the bus right now. Um so first option is that the district could assume responsibility for child find and providing special education services free and appropriate public education to all three to 5 year olds living in residing in the district limits.

Um there's a and I'll go into a bit more about that but I want to outline there's a second option to do the same thing but only do that with four to five year olds.

The third option is to kind of start where you are, use what you have, which is really good and do what you can um without any support from the state. So, back to the support um for next year. Uh the state offers some significant financial and technical assistance to districts that want to sign on. Um it's through an early adopter program.

Uh started two years ago. They're currently this year they're in the second cohort.

So starting in September 2026 there's a detail between July and September that I won't get into yet starts the third cohort. Um and DOE is working with people now with districts now talk about options for cohort three entry. There needs to be a commitment at some point within the next few months from a district if they want to join. So have that background knowledge. Uh the financial incentive comes in three buckets.

There's a per pupil budget allocation and it's based on the student child count quarterly.

So and it's paid quarterly. So the real benefit of that is you're going to be able to build a budget through an individual contract with the DOE that um best serves your students.

and you'll get 100% funding for whatever budget that you agree to this and that.

So through that uh usually the big cost of staff um materials, supplies, equipment uh these are some things that other districts have had to pay for. Um there are examples of of budgets. Uh didn't bring them here. pretty grainy, but um it's really important to know that other districts have done this, are doing this, and it's also very individualized to the district. So, you know, RS5 is going to work on a contract under this funding formula that would um meet their specific need.

So, that's one option.

So that under that funding bucket and option B, you would only take on responsibility for four to five year olds. The funding is less because you have less students per student. Now the second um important funding uh bucket is high allocation cost. So you've already got a per pupil cost um which is worked into a budget that you agreed upon. If a student for some reason with really high needs either moves in or required one student that you already have requires more um that money is uh paid for whatever increase you have is paid for. If you have students move in between child let's say between October 1st and January 1 since you have a account on January 1 that number goes up. So students go up funding goes up. they really want this to work, right? Because they have to hand it off. And you uh districts have like that distinct honor to serve their youngest and most vulnerable learners. So, it's really like you get to do this. Um so, this is where it gets exciting.

So, you can, you know, access some pretty solid funding. Um, and there's one there's a third third bucket that I think is timesensitive because it's a limited fund and once it's gone, it's gone. Currently, there is a a fund um that will pay for structure, equipment, and materials for a district that join the cohort.

Each year, I've hear that the uh the dw says this may go away. This may go away.

go away. So, it's going to eventually it is it is a finite pool of money as opposed to would you sign on for a fairly adopter cohort 3 that funding will not go away. It's written in law and until July 1st, 2028, the law would have to change for that to change.

Again, the the structure, equipment, funding, which I've had some experience with. The state comes through um they'll pay what they need. You'll agree, they will order it, they'll have it delivered, and they'll come in and set it up. That it works.

It's really helpful. Um and so you know those those are options for next year as an added important piece of information they will do that early. So and the idea is that they said you can enjoy this stuff this year kind of free of charge and have it ready to go. So the idea you can prep this year without assuming official responsibility until September 1st. um early allocation. If you wanted to get started hire hiring people, they'll take the first allocation of of money, first quarter, give it to a district early so they can as early as April the uh they're asking about January now, but at least April so that you can start hiring, make a plan, get what you need done.

So there's only so then we can move to 2027. uh that year. There's only two options, right? You can access state funding for three to five year olds.

There's no more four to 5year-old option or continue on your path through five funding and efforts and and then July 1st, 2028. However those paths have taken you, it's there.

It's yours. And um that's the fun part.

Once this decision is made or however you decide to do with the fun part, you get to start creating program. All the creative things are done already. It's it should be a lot of excitement. Um the communities that I I've been involved with. Um it's been really important to get some investment. Um I'll give one example just so you can kind of get a scope. Um we had some um community daycare share with our our transportation department a car seat training. Um these little things just get people involved in the mission and it starts to bring home you start to see you know what does it mean to serve the youngest most vulnerable learners and you know what does that impact make later you know I think research been pretty clear that earlier start it'll come soon better for families Oh, sure.

Yeah.

So, the ones that I outlined in the first um these next three slides kind of outline what I was already just talking about really.

So, this is the first option. second option that so I think maybe at some point um so essentially um all main districts are mandated to identify students with disabilities and find which is our child find responsibility and provide free and appropriate education to 3 to 5 year olds by July 28 which is what how we frame this already. So there are um this will be a piece that that is something for us to really think about.

Right now we screen which meets kind of our child find uh responsibility children who are coming to us. So people who are deciding to come to our prek, we're screening them and then we might refer them to special education at that time if we if there's a need that's flagged. And then currently CDS are responsible for doing the evaluations and um you know following that process through. So once we expand or as we grow, we're going to need to literally find children who might not be have been funneling through our schools. Um, and we'll have greater responsibility around that. So that kind of process we're going to need to think about differently. um that will all be part of kind of how this decision goes because really right now we screen our four year olds in February and March before the upcoming school year. So we're really thinking about two year olds to get ahead of the three-year-old piece. So there's like a really big scope as to where this this kind of is going to take us.

Yeah. So this um this chart just really explains that there is a requirement also. So another layer to this is that it isn't necessarily just taking responsibility for the special special education part. Special education is a layer that adds on to a general education program. Um, so children who need time with typically developing peers need a general ed education program to to be able to spend that time. Right now, our programming is fully inclusive. Um, and anyone with an IEP is in is fully in our four-year-old program. Um, and so the expectation is that a four four-year-old program is at least nine hours a week. Currently, we have more hours than that. Um, but then And then for a three-year-old program, six hours a week, but that's that will be the same across those three years.

I think the rest actually um so we'll then when we join a cohort and whatever decision that that becomes the responsibility then will shift to us for all of the three to five year olds.

And again, just so that there's an understanding, there's pieces that we do, but we don't do it all. So, in our K12 special ed, we are responsible for all the paperwork, all the um assessments, all the evaluations, um all those piece. So, this will mean we're taking all of that from CDS. Right now, we are we provide service, but we are not doing all that administration part. Um so, that'll be another layer.

will be legally responsible for all the complaints and anything that comes um on the the backside of um any lack of provision which currently it's easy to say oh CDS you know it's that that that will be our responsibility um and then this freedom to design and implement and maintain plans to meet that mandate and again the money is there's a transition money available so then just to kind of wrap it up. Um these are kind of the the kind of key parts.

We have options. We'll have that responsibility. The special funding, as we've heard, is available for the next two years and then it will become part of kind of the typical funding. Um and we've always talked about early intervention being best and then also kind of starting this process earlier is just going to help our current systems um versus kind of tackling it all at once. And the idea is we spend now you pay less later. Starting challenges is who knows what that will look like. Um we were able to hire phenomenal people on our own intervention team. um because I do think people working in early childhood which has very specific certification um you know are currently employed by CDS so we're looking for kind of employment in in schools but many schools have already hired from that pool so it's completely new tricky um just your last two slides are a series definition. So, some of this terminology might be new to us or to reference back and so that you know who we've been working with so far to assemble this and vet our own understanding which is developing. Um, this is uh this is the list of people involved so far.

They have their fingerprints on everything we've shared this evening.

happy to take any questions.

Thank you. Um I'm just wondering in terms of size, is it just like the other grades, whoever registers the number or is it similar to how we do prek now and there's a maximum?

So currently our gened programming is capped at 16. We can only take 16. Um I'm not sure I have the full answer to your question. I'm not probably not the person sponsor. Um so I guess that will be a question for us.

Are we taking everyone who walks in the door? What we will have to do is take everyone who has an IEP. And and there are there are so many variables that would play into that. There are ways and I think that folks up there can speak to this better than I can, but there are ways that we can step into this. So, for example, it is possible for us to assume responsibility for those children who have IEPs, but not have them in our schools. We could be pushing our services out to daycarees that are in the area. However, with that said, those daycarees need to meet certain conditions by the state and then on a child by child basis, depending on what the child's needs are, that child's least restrictive environment might be a full day setting with neurotypical peers. And so, we need to take that into account. We need to have something to offer them in that area. Can I say that relatively well? So, um, there really is a full pallet of of options that we have to sus out as we we need to see what we need to partner with the providers in our community. We need to take a really good look at what we would be able to provide. Um, I think that you heard a lot about staffing needs right now. A need that is prominent in my mind is space. I I just don't know at the moment where we would do this. Um that we would have that's something we would have to figure out.

Can I ask y So my understanding is by beginning this implementation sooner, we would be entitled to more money from the state.

But the downside to that is that we may not actually have the time to put together an actual plan with the infrastructure and the staffing and everything that we need to make this happen smoothly. So that's the struggle or the challenge I should say.

I I would say that at this point we have a year essentially uh and that the state has expressed confidence that they can support us in arriving there ready um as ready as other districts have. Um we have access currently as of this week to the sync network which is the CDS um network that shows us who is coming to us and who has been identified. So we have all of the information about what is um what is the current level of need.

That said it wouldn't be a light lift and we would need I think Tom spoke to the um Superintendent Gray spoke to the um need for some administrative oversight specific to this programming level.

So, did I hear you say that we would need to commit to option one in relative short order though?

Yeah. And yeah, I think um February asked for the latest for commitment.

So, we would have to have the the uh primarily the space question.

um as well as the funding questions nailed down and confident that we can do this let's call it three months October November December four months January y I my experience is that you going a little later but that's stated deadline right so so this is July like July one kits show up right so yeah so you would assume responsibility on September 1st they've decided they'll keep them through the summer program I think actually that the most immediate need would be staffing and the oversight of the program because with space not that I'm sitting here recommending any particular action at the moment but there are sort of the long-term and the short-term solutions. So a shortterm solution could be we join a cohort for that year. We have um administrative and clerical support. We have staff ready to be pushed into the kids where they already are in the community, but we may not be ready to bring all of those kids into our facilities yet. And we have to think about that part.

So, it's responsibility, not actual services in our in our like in our schools. That's what we're talking about.

And it can be a mixed model. Yeah, I think it does.

So, we could take we can support this many but not everybody. So, we Yeah.

I will say that um just to tag on to that question if I could that um you have a year to prepare to do that work then it starts um so that there's a lot of technical assistance that helps um it's really hard to to well actually overstepping there I want to tack off that I have an opinion Exactly. I think sort of what I was going to ask is if you all have a recommendation for us or if um um I guess where where the end point is for the board to be engaged in this decision or if you have the decision bring it to us.

Thank you for asking that. So at the moment I don't have a recommendation for you. I feel that Um, we are all in the stage right now about really learning what the mandate is and what the options are and I to my knowledge the board hasn't yet heard as as direct a presentation as this yet about what's coming up to us. So that seems to be the place to start. Um, I do think that over the next like in short order we need to have continued conversations about this and we are most I want you to know that we're on it. We're really part of this as a priority to try to figure out what works the best. Thank you. I really appreciate that.

This presation is really really helpful.

I think you laid out options. Thank you so much.

So option B for next year is that essentially what we're doing now but basically taking that ownership piece away from CDS, right? If we're already providing services to the four and five year olds we have, right? Yeah.

So when you saw that chart, we're doing 12 year old 12 of the students out of 28. Um so we would then be responsible for those 14 and finding these two that aren't served yet. Uh there may be some increased child fine and there we have 15 kids in referrals. So we would be responsible to do what we're doing now with an increased amount.

Right. Yeah. I'm sorry. I I didn't ask my question correctly. So, in terms of the services we're providing to the current four and four and 5-year-olds that are in our school, this is essentially an expansion of that same program, right? We take over the ownership for all the kids. Um, presumably they might not all still come depending on depending on their circumstances and daycare options. And I mean, I know I lived in district, but I my kids went to daycare out of district because there wasn't an option in town.

So, I couldn't have done I couldn't have sent them even if I wanted to um for that reason, right? So um but in terms of kind of the services we're delivering that's what our early intervention team is doing now I'll just add yes and right so that partially there is a population of ch children with special needs who are not serving so if a child needs more than what we would kind of call a resource level so that means they spend most of their time with typically developing peers If children have more significant needs, so would in kind of K12 programming, they would be more like in an FLS program. So they have less time um functional skills.

Yes. Sorry. Yeah. So they have less time in a in a general ed classroom. We are unable currently to serve that level of need based on what we have in our schools, but we would be required to under this program.

And some I think an import one important point about that is through this allocation part um they'll if we have to pay for a special purpose school if your district would um or build a classroom that it's 100% paid for by this allocation. So either we do it or pay for somebody to do it for now but just that's important that's in the structure and equipment bucket.

No that that's in the the full the full bucket that that one will last both years. The funding bucket is here until it runs out.

I think a few things that I I would be ready to strongly recommend that we consider is that whatever this program looks like going forward, it will need more staffing. We need to plan for the staffing. The most prominent example I can give you right now is in uh special services. We could not we can't meet this mandate with the current level of administrative and clarable oversight that we have. So we have to anticipate that that will have to provide that and it would be advantageous to have that piece in place as early as possible as we have to start finding children identifying children and providing a level of need that we're not currently responsible for.

Um, and then the other piece that I would strongly recommend regard no matter what the end product looks like is that this isn't something that if we do it thoughtfully, we can just sort of tack on to the front end of the school system. It it it needs to be integrated. It it will affect every level of the system the way that it fits both in terms of the spaces that we use and the people that we hire and budgets and our programming. And we need to be thinking as we put this in place to get rid of the best longterm solutions.

I'm wondering if you can speak more about what that administrative role that would be special program.

Off the top of my head, it would be it would be in it would be either an early childhood program coordinator who would be nestled in of the formal title is director of special services I believe or director of instructional support I can't remember exactly the words that we use here but it would be working with Aisha it could be framed as an assistant who had primary responsibility for early childhood um that's a high level of um thank you so much for that presentation was and I want to preface it by saying it was super clear and I really appreciate how well organized it was and I didn't follow it. So everything else is just my brain trying to catch up. Um if just I guess if we're not going to do this just be clear but if the board were tonight to say like absolutely we want to go with option A 26 27 what does that mean? like what does that mean in terms of how that impacts the conversations about the budget cycle? Um what does that mean in terms of how much we can know now in terms of money that we'll be able to get from the state?

Like just what does that I I just can't wrap my head around like what that really means.

So that I can speak to that small piece just through experience with another district. So what happens next would happen if you decide to do that. um you'll sit down with the financial team at the state and they'll run down what you have for an allocation and your proposed budget. So you'll say this is what we need and they'll say okay usually um you know there'll be some back and forth and then you're just saying okay to whatever we need.

There's actually anouou component that gets negotiated between the district and the state. Um, and our legal counsel would be involved in that in that arrangement as well. So there's a financial you should know that although there is significant state financial support for the setup end of this after 2028 that support is gone and the cost becomes ours and we are we receive funding at the level of EPS reimbursement which is about 25% of the cost. So full disclosure after 2028 this is going to be a a driver of our budget.

So that 100% number is a big one for you for this district in particular. So that's you know 75% for two years that you're getting that wouldn't I think the big limiting factors right now Colin and others feel free to chime in. Um, I don't know where we would house this right now and our spaces are tight and we're going to have to get really creative and very deliberate about how we tackle that and I don't know how much time it takes us to make a good decision around that. So that that's one one thing where a play for time might be helpful. Another is um if I return to staffing, as everybody knows, we are struggling to fully staff some of our special education roles. We're down six and a half edte as it is. It's really hard to find edte. Um and the service providers don't just grow on trees either. So the these are big pieces of the puzzle that that will be hard to be real challenges.

One thing I think that might be helpful is for my brain think about the money um is what are we leaving on the table if we push out a year, right? Like so what's the maximum we could get versus what would we get in the second year? Um I'm interested in knowing like what is considered a reimburseable expense is the if we have to bring in an early uh childhood education coordinator to support the IEPs and admin support is that covered or is it strictly like face-to-face services?

Yeah, perfect answer. Yes, it is covered. You know, if you assistant director, wherever you put it as and that is why they offer the early allocation so that you can hire somebody like that. You can hire an extra admin assistant through the database transfer bringing a lot into the K to2 fold.

So there is an example of budget that I have that's been sanitized that I can offer potentially but it kind of one district what they got through the allocation what they worked out to theirou it can show you gives us idea gives people ideas and what what was actually paid for but it'll be you know you don't have to read anything you don't want to do either and that's all fit into that 100% that all is allowable then there is additional special allocation that's dwindling by the month um as districts who have joined prior cohorts are utilizing it for things that go above and beyond that. Um so equipment um facilities modifications so accessibility features things like that that might um be in it like extra to that 100% allocation.

So 100 isn't really 100 plus whatever else you might need.

100's like then spend it. Yeah, the extra and just to give a scope of technical assistance, um the state's already offered us some dates to come and look at just to do a site walk through and say, "Hey, we could do this for you, you know, without a commitment." I was going to ask that if the technical support might help us with the discussion about space and where and they're they they will be generous uh at a certain level and then they will focus their attention on those who are members of cohorts because a great need there across the state. So their um their technical support will be pretty um abbreviated for those not yet in cohorts.

And does that 100% in 26 27 drop to a lower percent in 2728? No, it's 100 up until they join.

Okay. So we don't leave any money on the table going pushing it a year.

But we do have to go three to five in the second year. We can't right the the four to five is gone and the the special the extra money could be gone.

Yeah.

Right. Probably people who we would want to hire might have already been snack.

So what do with the sanitized sample budget that you mentioned presumably there's some um heavier lift in the initial years of pro of starting programs like this like startup cost you know capital expenditures. What which of that is in the 100% which of that is in the extra bucket? And do you know like a percentage of how much you're spending in the initial years versus later years?

I do not.

Thank you. I'm not sure that's transferable between districts. Yeah. Because it's based on student count.

Uh so within a year you're going to have within a year you're going to have changes between quarters. within more kids are identified. There's 15 in referral right now. Some of those are three year olds.

I guess just to make sure I'm asking the question clearly like in terms of maybe like infrastructure, right? So presumably there's going to be some costs that are related to just getting facilities up and running period. It would that be in the 100% or would that be in the extra money if there's some available to some extent though?

Yeah. So physical um I think one way is pretty close. So if it's physical um it's private special allocation.

If it's infrastructure you know staff and patterns that would be 100% like the oneoffs versus the um equipment that stays fixed in the classroom. Those kinds of things are in more the 100% range and then the additional the oneoff sorry that additional funding for readiness.

Yeah, I I guess just on the on the space side of it, um I guess I guess I got a couple of questions around that. One is um don't tell Jen that this is an idea, but like if we moved the high school out of the high school into like all of the vacant um store fronts in uh in downtown Freeport um and therefore had this building uh available um to fill a three-year-old.

Yeah, exactly.

It's fun. Um what like what is like if that if we had that space then then B are you are you saying that basically we could as long as we could find the people to staff it? um we could get a lot basically the all of the funds necessary to get this space tricked out for those for the three and 5 year olds.

Uh we wouldn't have to we wouldn't have to add anything else to the budget for next fiscal year. Is that accurate?

No. I'm not comfortable saying that. Well, then what? Yeah. What's so far? So, if they for instance, you walk through the um the kindergarten classrooms uh in the states. Oh, we could offer you some of these smaller furniture if you're going to have a three-year-old rotating through. Um you know, you don't have a EDA entrance, you know, that can help with that sort of structure. Uh give you some toilets that are lower to the ground that um I just I don't I wouldn't say no. It's just not within my scope to say how much of a retrofit they're going to do to a building.

I mean, I think at the moment I trying to I don't want to overpromise anything and I I just don't know the answer to that.

You think my high school idea is not going to fly. It's career education.

Yeah. You know, I guess why I'm asking is I guess I really don't understand the difference between saying we need a new space in new space to handle this in September versus a year from September in terms of like are we talking about like what are we talking about? Are we talking about um a number of trailers?

Are we talking about a a new structure that we're constructing? I guess that's where I'm just confused as to what is it could be a reconfiguration.

How are we going to know that between now and or not.

I think Tom made a good point about mixed delivery.

That's what a lot of um so if we looked there were seven three-year-olds on the list right now. There's going to be more but um so there are kind of a few options that I've seen around there's itinerant meeting. We're sending our people into daycarees.

We're inviting students to come into our programs that are here for research. Um, and some districts are doing that by providing transportation because a lot of parents can't leave at 10:00 a.m. to bring a kid to another building to do an hour of speech therapy and then bring them back. So, there's they have bought a van people for a district that's happened. I think you know once you decide as a group and have some clarity on what you want and how you would want to deliver it.

Yeah. So here here's what we have. We'll take we'll join here because they want us to wants districts to do this for all these reasons.

Yeah. Because they don't want CDS doesn't want this responsibility anymore. So the sooner we get them off of that that list the better turning to them. Right. So and also I think two years right now is not all that much to be ready for July 2028. You know, we're halfway through the early adopter program as a community, as a state.

Has um uh any districts partnered with other districts to I mean, in terms of the number of kids, it could be a lot of effort for not a ton of kids potentially. Like, is there a way to pull the kids?

Partnerships are possible. I mean, not that you want to ship three-year-olds too far. I mean, the same issue with kindergarters, I guess.

I'm just picturing the vans they're buying full of car seats. I mean, these are little toddlers. These are three-year-olds.

It's fun. We're at work. We do it. It's a lot, but it's fun. And a lot of parents do want to drive, especially if you're in the morning.

That's just my experience around the district.

I just have to say I really appreciate your positive attitude around this and how this is fun and we have the privilege of of serving these sweet little three-year-olds and foury olds. So, thank you.

I think that that's a that's a really good point. This is this is a lot. We don't know what it's going to look like yet. I honestly believe it's good for kids. It's good for kids and families.

We can do a better job with it than doing and I don't mean to cast shade on CVS, but we're just better set up to meet that need. Um, we got to get from A to B in a pretty short amount of time.

So, I have a couple questions on definitions. Um, is a three-year-old considered a three-year-old for this coverage? Is there a specific date that they must three? Is there a possibility of us serving two-year-olds to meet the three-year-old October 15th?

Yeah. Like when is a three-year-old considered a three-year-old? And the other one I had was um is there a possibility that we would have so many IEP students in four or five that we would have strictly IEP students being served for?

No. Second question. Um so there are there would be 20 right now as it stands there would be 22 24 um across the whole district. So um that the whole unless you decided to put them all like 36.

So we have eight and a half classes of 16 a piece. I know they're not all full but how many prekers we currently have.

Do you know when a three-year-old is a three-y old? So they they join on their birthday. Okay. Which means it's rolling.

Yeah.

So a 2-year-old couldn't show up on the first day of school if their birthday was October 1st. Yeah.

And they don't come um one thing I think is they don't come as a surprise.

There's three meetings. Uh I think it's two years, three months.

There's three meetings between two and three which they kind of get introduction basically um evaluating and then you know where they're they're supposed to have on their third birthday. So for instance I have kids in referral now that we've accepted but they won't turn three until about November so they can come to school for them.

I just want to tag on to that because that is an example of where we need additional administrative support uh to structure that onboarding um to make sure that all of those appointments are scheduled with families in the environment that is most fitting. Um, so there's like just a lot of logistics that begin before the child actually enters school and three-year-olds come into us, would come into us, will come into us in a in a um in rolling fashion throughout the year.

Did the other thing I hear was um around shifting our current prek to have to be full day as opposed to the current half day. That's that's not a requirement.

This is these are the minimum uh service requirements in the on this slide. Um that is and we currently exceed we yeah we currently exceed these.

Okay. So like if I'm reading that right for a three-year-old it's an hour and 12 minutes a day.

Well, that would be up to right depends on depends on the top.

Yeah. Typically, they run through it to be in two days or three hours.

Okay. So, it wouldn't necessarily have to be like what we have for prek now, which is five days, half days for everybody.

No, but part part of the picture may be that there are advantages to having some full day settings available.

So that may be something we want to consider as we look at this child situation.

So that's three year olds. There are there is two sorry um there is one case talked about there are some full day students that if it's written in their IEP they need a full day program. Um those are generally just special purpose schools. So students with the highest needs.

So are we talking out of district placement for three-year-olds for Yeah. Either one that still exists in this that still exists but we are currently not paying for that. Yeah.

Right. And you won't be till 2028 either with cohort or not. Right. The cohort will pay for that but we're still responsible for the child portion. at that point in 2028. So becoming practiced in that work is very important.

I'm wondering more about the finding part of this and the different steps.

So, if I was a parent with a two or threeyear-old who I had developmental concerns about, I would probably go to my pediatrician first with my kids doctor and they would then refer me to CVS probably and I would probably wait a really long time. Um, this is like current situation. And then eventually maybe I that child would get an IEP and be either served through CVS or through the district. What will happen going forward is that that pediatrician would maybe refer us to the school district.

Okay. And then this database.

Okay. Yeah. Can you tell? Okay. So that the same database. So that um ties in I was saying it's going to become what we do now for K to 12 referrals that will prek and child find child for three year olds which you're talking about would come to us directly so or to whatever issues sorry I'm dealing this elsewhere so um you're a collective us tonight it's fine okay thank you so you who would say, "Hey, you're here. Here's a contact info for for your school. You can get connected." And that's a big part of I think I know really community community engagements. Um, and we want to spread awareness like we wrote some we wrote letters to pediatricians like, "Hey, we're doing this. Um, come see us.

We have a link now just like CDS did but on our website all the system stuff is you know we'll get some support to build out or just build out what else you know answer your question I I think I meandered but come to the school for so just essentially eliminate CDS's involvement at all so then is there a concern that we would not find children.

So there's still it's a concern that we would miss children that we would have to be doing some more searching going to daycarees going to Yeah. I again fun [Laughter] earlier like we had a different definition and you can do it Cara. I mean that's currently a concern. Um, currently there are kids I I can say from my own experience when you're moving from um I'll put that back up in a minute, but when you're moving from um um CDS referral into a school-based system, um we have found as many as double once the word is out that we have the ability to serve. Um so the numbers can as much as double. um it doesn't mean we are able to serve all of those needs, but it is currently the case that not all children are being found and or served. And that's part of the motivation um that a community-based organization like a school district with its resources colllocated to serve these needs is a better model and it does happen in other states as well. So when do you think we will have an accurate estimate in terms of how many students we may have?

You have it. That is that data is as of this week.

Does it seem strange that the four-year-olds there's 20some and the three-year-olds there's five?

I mean is it just they're not identified yet? Yeah.

Yeah. They keep going to the doctor and those developmentally appropriate milestones are being measured and these referrals come in and there is a rolling and you've got a really good early that's starting to see them when they're four starting to see.

Yeah. The likelihood of four year olds being in a program is high. So, you know, they're not all getting referred from their pediatricians and things.

Sometimes it's whatever childcare providers they're at now are also making those referrals. So, you know that it's not surprising that that number's higher as fours. Also, you know, there's a lot of room for let's wait and see when a child is three versus four, you know, and then you start to see patterns develop and you're like, ah, yeah, no, this is this is something we need to take a look at. Um there are you know however hard we um work at our child find you know there are still children who show up in kindergarten who have been next to you know the reality is that there will be you know either families who are not don't go to pediatricians they are not engaged in the community who suddenly realize their child should be at school or they're connected with someone and they come okay we got to get a referral moving quickly. So I think just that is a reality.

Yeah. I mean for me the the full day versus half day is a huge question because that doubles the space and the staffing requirement, right? Just strictly going from half day to full day. I mean we cut our capacity in half unless it doesn't have to be all one or the other. Well, I know, but like, you know, but understanding understanding what that looks like or could look like, you know, I don't know how we undertake the the facilities without knowing what we're trying to find space for like and and maybe this is just because this is all for me anyway very new. So, my brain is like spinning in circles here. um circular with the the minimum and max hour requirements notwithstanding an IEP that would require a full day.

It's it's possible though that it's maybe it's a whole day but it's one day instead of two half days, right? that where it wouldn't necessarily be an actual double potentially potentially. I mean, but I know when we and Julie jump in because I forget or misrepresent things on occasion. Um we we used to have half day prek and you were a Tuesday Thursday or a t or or a Monday Wednesday and they alternated Fridays and they found that consistent fiveday instruction was better even like half the time but every day for consistency with the with the kiddos.

Um, I'm not sure if that thinking has changed where we I mean I would think it'd be even more important for this this group of of kids for that to be true. But yeah, I think it's clear that we wouldn't want to go back to part-time full day. Um, I think if we're talking full day, we're talking five day full day. I mean, it definitely is beneficial for children to be at school every day and more so for our children with IEPs. But is there is there a threshold? Like, you know, I'm thinking of a three-year-old in a school all day. Yes, that's long.

They have nap time installed and snacks and movement breaks that are developmentally appropriate. I Ted runs a three-year-old program.

Yeah. I So, um, fulltime for for three year olds, half base even the special purpose schools, unless they're district. We have special purpose classrooms and they're full time. is 15 hours a week and you know tough on that but a lot of having extra program with three-year-olds hasn't having meeting the requirements 15 hours seems to work really well and some of these kids you know they get an hour speech right so six hours of gen inclusion is plenty work on the hour specific goals of take turns turn taking right it's hard to do if you don't have some other I think that's the thinking um and CDS has really admitted they don't really have a school right they have a special ed service so they don't have places you know that's been a challenge for them and that's where the district stuff on that's helpful because you know in my head full day is 8 to 3 when our kids are in school but that's not necessarily bold time for a three-year-old. So that's helpful.

Yeah. Again, thank you so much for all of this. I I have a thousand questions, but I'm not going to ask them because I think I'm just going to ask question, which is how do we make how do as a district do we make this decision between now and I'm going to just ch I'm going to use that February um uh date like how do we do that? what is our process for um I guess either evaluate like doing further evaluation of either this the students that we would need to serve the administrative capacity that we would need the space requirements um how is that going to happen who's going to do it take a stab at that I I think it's important to I hope this doesn't come across as dismiss it at all not intend to be. Tonight's not the night where we have to every we have to know everything. Um, tonight's the night where we have to grasp the problem.

I think the next step is to get much more specific about what the funding from the state will be so we can make an informed decision about do we jump sooner or we jump later and also we need to have a stakeholder group that I think is looking at all of the options that come before us. So I think If we kind of break the work into chunks, to me, those are the two next steps. Develop a stakeholder group and get more specific information about the funding that's available and then come back to the board with some of that information in a short term. I'm not talking months from now. I'm talking like next month.

Yeah. The the opportunity cost for me is a big one. Like what do we lose by pushing out a year? you know, if there's if it's a bucket of money that's going to be gone before we get to February anyway, we lose nothing. If it's, you know, there is a real opportunity that there's still money to be had and and we're going to have to do these things whether it's this year or next year, then, you know, that might that might compel us to do something sooner.

For me, that's important. Kelly, no, I was just going to add in sort of in the stakeholder group discussions Part of that will be the big pieces of facilities because you say that's a really major obstacle that we need to think about in terms of the streets.

Exactly. And some of those conversations could be really sensitive and I think that's where there's also a decision about the timing of our of how we proceed.

I would predict that when we really get into facilities and I should add another step doing a walk through with folks who can really help us look at our facilities and see what we can manage manage it.

Yeah. How quickly we could move all the high school kids to LLB for internships.

Um let me see if I could get back to my Oh yeah. So um I think the facilities piece depending on the options that we end up seeing before us could be sensitive and when you have a sensitive topic to talk about the amount of time that you have to talk about it and invest in bringing people along and and considering the options is an important factor in the timing of the overall decision. So that's a piece that we'll need to get clarity on over the next few months. I think the facilities tool will help us even envision in general what are the options in front of us and our facilities tour is scheduled for October 1st.

So they gave us Yeah. So and I met with um the woman that will be coming to do that on Monday. She offered a few dates the principles and other people were able to do October 1st. I need to get back to to um the DOE after this meeting and just you know give a little rundown um but hoping that they can come on that day. Um you know know that what what's been accomplished so far and uh let everybody know that but they will be quick in their turnaround what they're going to offer through the special funding. So again, you know, somebody might want to focus that, but let somebody else want to join in on that for some other fun. It gets better.

Oh, no. I'm not there's there's volunteering.

You mentioned that there are other districts you could talk to as well. Yes. Learn about what has worked for them.

There's been a lot of work in the greater Sobago group to which we belong uh around this around sort of resource sharing and idea sharing. There are also and any number of other districts that have jumped onto earlier cohorts. Um in some cases the that has not gone well. But for some of those other districts um you know it's hard work.

It's really difficult to figure out. So we have examples to learn from. Um, and I'm actively in the process of trying to tap into that collective wisdom.

Um, I'm just curious if other districts Well, I would imagine that there are districts out there potentially um that already have full day prek that this is I I know this is already going to be a heavy lift.

The district that came from has full day prek. So the transition for them is going to look probably much different than for us. And I guess I'm wondering about that piece if if we want to have fully prek option for all children eventually. That's a I think that's an important piece to consider.

Full because there's a different proposition between having a full day three-year-old program and having a full day fouryear-old program. And you know, we currently have the the half-day four-year-old program, but as we look at the bigger picture, it may make sense to think about is full day four-year-old programming a good option. And is now the time to integrate that into an overall approach? I I don't know the answer to that, but it's worth asking the question. And certainly, yeah, I think that's a good point that we want to have that conversation now when we're thinking about facilities and space and you know to say, okay, we could accomplish this now with the number of kids we have now and the half day programs we have now, but if we think that the plan is that we're seeing that maybe full day is a better option for four-year-olds, we want to be thinking about that in advance of getting there going, "Well, it just made sense when we did it, but we didn't think it all through." The other thing I'm just going to throw out there um is that you know this is a huge undertaking and I appreciate I mean this is just a huge undertaking for this what you gave us tonight you wouldn't mind implementing so thank you for that uh for your quick turnar around. Um but we also have a lot of other large undertakings on the plate this year. This isn't in a vacuum the only thing that you know I have full faith uh in in our team to deliver miracles. They do it all the time. But um I also don't want to, you know, drown a new administrative team in the district who is undertaking a, you know, a very meaty strategic plan process and a variety of other things across the district. Um I just I just want to, you know, kind of look at it from a global perspective too that this would be a really heavy lift if there was no other heavy lifts on the plate. I say that I really have to give a lot of credit to the people you see right there. Erica and Julie and Ted have done an incredible amount of work and their their knowledge about this is far more granular than mine. So I'm really leaning on them and they've done a fantastic job and we don't want to burn any of those people out. So I just got a thing. I would just wonder if we had budget to bring Ted to every meeting just to kind of be like generally positive like kind of looking for it just encouraging.

I like the boss tone and the mighty mighty boss tones. The guy just dances the fun. Are you saying you need him to dance?

That might be best one. How much money? I'm not volunteering to fill that role, but I did have like a positive thought that I thought would be interesting to share, which is when I think of Julie's presentation about this data, when I think that this is going to happen at some point, to me, I get excited about the additional data that we'll get from it. So, team excitement.

Yeah. And I do want to give, you know, props to the, you know, uh, well, Lisa's not here anymore, but Julie and Will who came to us several years ago, even probably at least a full year before we actually did it about the need for servicing kids younger and, you know, accessing the the gaps before they become vast. So, um, so good job seeing the future. You saw what was coming down the pike.

Yeah. No, I mean it is this is exciting. It's it's a lot of moving parts, right?

But to have to have just kids sooner in our schools, I think it's beneficial to everybody and you know families and you know students and it is exciting. It's it's you know it builds on what we have started to to create and recognize the need for. So it philosophically aligns with kind of what we've already been doing, right? I mean so that's good. We're farther along the path than some people on that route, I'm sure.

I had not been on the job for 48 hours before I was in Julie's office with her giving me a rundown of why we needed this now. So, um, she's been very dedicated to this work for a long time.

Okay. So, we can expect some updates in the next month or so about site visits and funding and we might get an update every board meeting.

Okay. Right. Your your board your your superintendent reports are just going to keep getting longer. feel like we want updates on strategic plan, we want updates on CDS.

Just out of cur, this is this is an actual question, not I mean they're all actual questions. Where do I look online to find the information about where the funding that CDS has been getting for this is going after it goes away after they no longer have that responsibility?

That that is that is an excellent question for which we do not have an answer.

We don't have an answer because it like it had like the answer doesn't exist like the it's a not this is not for you I'm not this not for you like legislator I've received no communication about this at all I mean theoretically speaking it probably I mean it is coming from the state which funds CDS which also funds subsidy it will run through the EPS maybe it's reallocated there I don't know Or maybe they didn't have it to be or they didn't. Right. Well, much or not enough. Yeah.

So, so me and Michelle that then we were serving these additional kids once we have the funding formula that we get of the money we get from the city. Yes.

Yeah. Like I guess I guess like again an honest question is like what where do I find the information about what funding CDS got last year for this work? Like what line like what line item is it under?

I mean I guess I'll just say I I couldn't give that specific answer but but as someone that is familiar with the state budget is really an extremely difficult budget environment right now.

know there was a shortfall last year and so I would say if there's any risk of any of these funds going away at all. Um certainly like the money being taken from CVS is just it's just gone it's gone into other programs. It's gone into so many other places. There are so many things that need funding right now um that just don't have it and it's really unfortunate. So, I think I mean I know we're not looking for an answer tonight, but from my perspective grabbing as much of that money like while we can because there's I think there's no guarantees and we know for sure it'll be off the table right by 2028 and yeah I don't 100% level.

Yeah. And I don't know if DOE is giving any confidence about whether that money will definitely be there until 2028. Yeah. It's written into the law.

Yeah.

Hopefully that wouldn't change but great. Yeah. things up first.

They could change the law. They could change the law and that have happened as part of right. So they go, you know, we'll pay you for this. And then you go, okay, in in good faith, you do it because they said they would. And then they're like, oh, sorry. Just change our mind.

Would also be a breach of theou that So yeah, what I mean, what does that mean?

Well, means you wouldn't be legally on the hook, but your kids would still need all this stuff. The people we'd already done the work.

We'd already brought the kids in. which is what you want really why you want to do it anyway. Yeah.

Okay. Uh how's everybody feel about that? But I think we all need to process a bit more.

Okay. Are you up again? Do you need a drink of water, Erica, before we move you on to the next one? I I'm just encouraging her to encourage you all if you come up with questions before the next meeting, make sure to send them email.

Yeah. As you're thinking of these things, I can begin to assemble an FAQ um with your questions so that we can just show those uh you know for for our purposes and for public history because we will have a lot of questions. Yeah. And I Yeah. And I'm sure they will be a lot of the same questions stuff from a variety of different folks. So yeah, that's a great idea. Thank you.

Okay.

While it seems hard to believe, the next package from Erica is actually even bigger than the last one. So we'll let her get started on that. Are you going to uh project that one up as well?

I will. Yes. And I think it might be better to view on the screen potentially. Um but it's totally up to you. Okay. So, we will move on to 9D, the beginning of year achievement data.

You don't have to move if you don't want to. I can keep you out of the screen. No, it's okay. We can't see it.

So, again, um I I learned this habit of introducing myself every time I'm at the podium from um a last position. And in case anybody's watching at home, I find it sometimes helpful to redo that. So forgive me and direct me if that's not your preferred method. Um so Erikica Mateo, assistant superintendent, you had asked me in the last meeting to offer a beginning of year um data overview for you. Um and I shared that I would be able to do that at kind of like the surface level. And so uh this presentation tonight is really a look at where we ended last year. Um, Julie did share in her earlier presentation that it's like what we refer to as endofyear data. Um, sometimes we we throw out an acronym because we're known for that. We call it EOI, but I will try not to do that. But, um, so we're basically looking at where we ended last year so as to inform the work that we are launching into this year. Um so with that I I would like to I actually before I advance the slide I just want to acknowledge the incredible work that has hap happened in this district to date.

This is an this feels like a very advantaged starting place. It feels like a very strong starting place. Um I think uh a lot of districts would prefer to be in your position when they start their year looking at the data from the year prior. So um it is with that position that I offer you opportunities for growth.

So I will just start with I guess I don't expect here um I just want to start with some attendance data. I'm going to try to offer you three years of data so that you can see a three-year trend line on on these pieces. Um but with regard to um attendance, this is at our aggregate level. So meaning all of our schools are brought together to demonstrate where how we're growing in the area of reducing chronic absenteeism and truency. And you can see our accomplishments on the top there. The average daily attendance rate is also increasing while our chronic absenteeism and truency is decreasing.

of the positive one. Really excited about this one. Um, as a former athlete myself, this feels really strong to be able to show you how much um, extracurricular participation we have our kids engaged in here in RSU 5 across the seasons and the grade levels and the programs with community programs being a major partner in that.

This is that in a visual. Same information.

Okay. So, here's where we start getting into academic achievement data. Um, I am um again I'm focused in these data sets on our end of year. So, how did we finish? So, did our kids meet or exceed grade level expectations? and wherever we landed, what is that telling us about what they need next? So, our K5 number sense screener is not that many years old. Is it three years oldish?

Number screener K5. So, I have three years of data for you. Um, and you will see that in numbers.

So, you should have this yes in your paper as well.

Um, so these are just quick assessments that um we utilize to look at grade level content mastery and um understand how our how our students are um performing up against the common core state standards for math.

There's an assessment rubric for each task and then um this is administered and scored um knee to me with kiddos in the classroom. It's not a computer. It's adaptive.

This is that uh same data but um at grade level achievement across our grade levels on the left there. You can't see it on the screen, but 160 is the population total.

happy to take questions.

So, math K5, this is reading K5. We use benchmark assessment for our K5 readers.

Um, that's a need to assessment. We administer that through our um strategists and specialists in our building. So our classroom teachers are partners in that work but it is delivered sort of objectively by a by a third party within the building.

This is how we are performing across three years across five grade levels spring and year.

This is another way of looking at that same data set.

I don't know about you, but sometimes it's helpful for me to see things the same things represented differently. So, if I didn't hit the mark, I accept feedback.

Can I just ask these um uh this isn't following the same cohort. So, it's not like I would look at the red over here and then move to the next color. It's the same. Red is the same grade. Okay.

I want to make sure I answer your question correctly. This is following.

So, these would be the same kiddos spanning 22, 23, and 23.

Oh, so they are cohorts. Yeah, that that would be the the children moving through. Oh, wait.

So, the same kid would be on the No, my apologies. This is I pulled these data from our state report and this is end of year. Yes. Yeah. First answer.

You would take a third grade and then you would jump to the fourth grade and then you jump to the fifth grade to see the same and these are the same data we reported to the state of Maine in our annual comprehensive needs assessment.

So this is our proficiency trend for benchmark assessment or reading as measured by benchmark assessment.

Okay. So when we get into third grade and I know we're cutting kind of like back to third grade because we just talked about K5. It is best practice to have two measures. Um so it is definitely not uncommon to see two measures um across K5. So beginning in third grade um we administer the NWA assessment. The state also participates in that now with its throughyear overlay on that. I won't get into the throughyear piece. I'm going to just keep us in what we know with the NWA.

Um the there are their RIT score. We're familiar with the RIT score. It's a three-digit number that our kiddos get um up to twice a year. And um this is going to offer us a um perspective as to how they perform compared to national norms. So this is our NWA map.

data for our third through 10th graders.

On the left at the top are the national norms references.

I will note that these are the 2020 norms. They have been updated to 2025 as we launch into this academic year. So, if you were to look these up online, you might find two different norms. That's just that's too much information, but potentially I don't want you to think there's a conflict. Um, grade 10, I will put an asterisk on that because the item bank is fixed and it doesn't behave the way that we knew NEIA to behave in the past. So, um, I would like to place an emphasis rather on 3 through 8 knowing that our grade 10 data does exist on the date on the state's dashboard.

On the right is how we've performed up against those natural arms.

The dotted lines are those benchmark um per the norms and then how we're performing compared to that benchmark.

the benchmark is placed at 42 to 60% achievement. Um, and so this is this is what you're probably accustomed to seeing.

I think you're probably accustomed to seeing us perform at this level. So, we're slightly above benchmark.

Um the way that Noia is divided in terms of achievement zero to 21% achievement is going to be that lowest range highest need for intervention.

What we often call tier three intervention. Um from 22 to 41% is the next highest need. what we often refer to as tier 2 intervention.

42 to 60% is that benchmark level. So those are kiddos who are in our tier one setting um and who are advancing to meet these you know at or above expectations.

The challenge that we have next is Noia places career and college ready benchmarking at the 61st% or higher.

So I just want to acknowledge that we haven't previously been looking at these data in that manner. We haven't previously been been elevating the conver you know like that that challenge to ourselves to the 61st or or better.

And that is really where we want 80% of our kids at at that level so that we are trending from the earliest grades to um that meter meet or exceed the college and career benchmark. So my next pieces are going to show you how we compare against those benchmarks.

I think this might be easier in the next visual. That's the same.

So this leaves us opportunity for growth in math.

and we will move up to high school assessments and see how this translates with college board assessments as well.

I'll move on to reading again. This is our grades 3 to asterisk 10.

Our performance is strong. Yes. Did you want to stop me?

Yeah. Can I ask a question about is it we should be comparing against that 61% of college readiness is there can you tell us more about why that's what we should be doing?

Sure. uh the the testing body, the Northwest Evaluation Association, that they have done the research to determine the predictive level of success when a child um crosses our stage and heads on to the next stage of their whether it's technical training or um or it is to a two or fouryear institution postcary.

So these it's a predictive indicator and we'll get we'll see it more in the college board's um college board has its own cuts in their in their um data as well.

So this is what you're accustomed to seeing that um you know 42nd to 60th range where our kids are doing meeting that benchmark level well right and and when we look on the state dashboard slightly different with the throughear overlay but you typically see this kind of achievement. So this is probably what you're accustomed to seeing.

This is then that 61st% cut as it relates to reading broken down third through Asper's 10th.

And here is how that looks in a visual that is similar to the So, is it fair to say that the 80% that we're shooting for isn't even on the chart because we're so far below it? Not yet. We're not there yet. Yeah.

Because that's what you said we should be shooting for, right? 80%.

80% of our kiddos, our hope is that they're at 61st% or better.

So, right now they're at the Third graders are most prepared for career college readiness.

They're doing great. Yes. Yeah. I have a question. Yeah.

Um I think I know how to ask it. Um, how on average, how much higher than the benchmark would we need to be hitting in order to be achieving this? I guess I'm trying to just I'm trying to translate between like we have that benchmark number and then we have these this number which I think which I think I think you you're right that is what we are used to seeing is sort of how we um compare with that benchmark but like again I don't I don't know if I'm asking the question correctly but I understand um maybe this one um this shows us our total number of students and then I had shared with you. That range of like 0 to 21 and then um 22 to um 41 and then 42 to 60. Here's our 61st to 80th and that's how many kiddos are landing in that range.

And that's what um Noia refers to as high average. And the high average trend line.

Oh yeah. is what we're what we're seeking for 80% of our students. Okay.

Yeah. I'm sort of curious if this is the goal, how many or what percentage of schools are actually meeting that goal of 80%.

That's pretty far off from where we're at right now.

So the 80% mark is a reference to multi-tered systems of support. That's um that's 80% in the base of tier one instruction. And to Julie's earlier points, then focusing the 20% your attention on intervention in that remaining 20% to bring them into those tier one opportunities and optimize their outcomes. I don't know how many districts specifically are um are accomplishing that level consistently at every grade level. um you will see how this impacts outcomes on those high school assessments as well when we get there. Um so it is truly seeming to be predictive of the outcomes. It's it's uh research to predict.

I I guess I guess I would follow up on Kelly's question though. It just I mean it seems like um if 1% of of uh school districts in America are hitting that um that seems like that's helpful to know, right? Uh because um or if it's 60%. that those mean very different things in terms of I think in terms of of where where we are in relation to that or how or what our aspirations might be. I think maybe I just speaking sorry maybe I just wanted to speak to the question about or the the the comment about more of our third graders are on track to be college ready than high school kids. And this is just this is not informed by any observation I've made in this district yet. But as somebody who's been in high schools for a heck of a long time, it is incontrovertibly true that the older the kids get, the more they blow off these tests, especially the NWA and high because the the scores don't really mean anything for the high school kids on an individual level. They're not accountable for these scores at all. And there are increasing number of kids who just fill in blanks. Now, I can't say for sure that that's what's happening, but I can say it happens a lot. So, that just something to consider.

Yeah, I think the 10th grade asterisk is very important.

The item bank is also fixed for those students. It's a different test. It behaves differently and kiddos interface with it differently.

I'll move on to some of our high school data.

So the PSAT and SAT um I can repeat this later in the presentation.

We have made our 10th grade PSAT assessment optional.

Our fall our fall 11th grade PSAT is supported by the school and so it's like scheduled and it's like just kind of how we do business. Um, our spring SAT for our 11th graders is standard operating offering and then it is an elective option again for our 12th graders. So, you're going to see some participation rates that mean things in the data sets.

Okay. So the college board benchmarks their predictive indicators of college readiness um at uh meeting or exceeding um with meeting or exceeding at um at demonstrating a 75% probability of earning at least a C in first semester credit bearing like 100 level coursework in post-secary.

So if you meet or exceed their benchmarks then then it is intended to be predictive of uh a likelihood to successfully persist in 100 level coursework.

Um ERW is how it spits it out in the test and on our spreadsheets and that is um English reading writing. I will note that writing is no longer a component of the state's assessment. So writing is a strength of ours in this district and it does show in these data.

So ERW grades 10 and then grade 11 and then math for 10 and then 11. That's how that's table is organized.

So can I just add the math? Those are very similar colors to me. Is is 11 the top line?

Um Oh, sorry.

Yeah, no worries. Um, so what Kelly was asking about is on the right side of the uh slide there, the math trends piece.

Um, so our um the darker line is our 11th grade and that's um on the top.

So that top line and then the lighter blue line, my apologies, clearly my artistry is not as clear um as it could be. Um but then grade 10 um is that lighter line trim.

So when I talked about our mandator sort of SOP uh participation, this is what that looks like.

Um like who takes us up on that? That changed last 23 24. So we we moved from being a all school all-in both years to an elective and that's what that is showing you participation rate.

Something to consider for your trend analysis.

So this is the PSAT and that is that um 10th grade optional 11th grade fall. Right now, we're going to move into the SAT.

So, the benchmarks for SAT are like these three-digit scores. Um, and they have uh they're cut at the 75% or they're sorry, they're in indicating that 75% chance of um of earning a C or better if you have like at at least at this level. And that er again is English reading writing.

So the um if you're looking at reading, the darker line is 12th grade on the top and the lighter red line is 11th grade on the bottom.

And if you're looking at math, the the darker line on the top is 12th grade and the lighter line is 11th grade on the bottom. Again, 11th grade spring is the is the standard operating when we do SAT. Not all kids participate in SAT because it's no longer the state assessment.

Um, just so I know, these are not predictive. They're not predicting that they're going to get 75th when they're at when they're in that first level of college.

Oh, sorry. They're not like So yeah, there's there's a big difference between the 11th and the 12th grade. Yes.

So they're saying that the the 11th grade students if they were currently enrolled in a college course, a 100 course, 75% of them would get a C or above if they had a 480 or higher.

They're not saying that in two years when they get to a first college course. Do you know what I do?

You understand my question? I'm sorry.

Like the the the previous ones the K through8 were were predictions whereas these ones are not predictions or is there really a big difference between our level of rates?

Um they're all predicting this um that the basically the Lexile and numeracy levels of students are trending in a direction that is predictive of career and college readiness. The different assessments cut it in different places.

Yeah. I guess the way I would think of it, I would hope that one extra year of school would push you a little bit higher towards college readiness so that more people would be at that 75% yeah predictive level, right? Um, but we're not we're not produc we're not creating an environment where all of our 12th graders are participating in the SAT and the SAT is not um is not mandated by the state any longer. For many years we were a we were administering the SAT as a state as our high school assessment. At that time it was done um in 11th grade. The federal mandate is 10th grade. Our state was behaving with an exception. And so that's why you see Noia sitting in 10th grade because we're meeting that federal mandate. SATs living more in 11th and 12th grade where it belongs.

Um so it is still there but elective.

Yeah. But whether or not it's an elective, an extra year that the 12th graders, it would kind of make sense that they might perform at a higher level just because they've had that extra education.

And these may be the kiddos who are really trying to get a higher score, right? The the 12th grade does not is not mandatory. It's an elective.

Yeah. And nor is the 11th I mean kids could not all of our kiddos participate.

But I I think the the concept that kids that are probably more driven towards high performance on the SATs are going to take it multiple times as opposed to all right, I'm going to go to school.

I'm going to take it once. I'm going to get my score. I'm going to move on as opposed to really high like I need the very highest score to potentially get into these whatever schools. They're probably more likely to take it again which could impact the Yeah. And um there has been mixed messaging in the post-secondary marketplace about the value ad of this particular assessment. There are many schools who communate communicate very clearly that this is not necessary any longer. So like that's um it is some mixed messaging. Um but we are we have it housed here at the high school still and I think that's a benefit to our students. um how how often is you know something you may want to so I'm going to to this point about participation rates I just found this helpful myself to look at it this way um so 11th grade is the lighter line on the top that's that's how many of our kiddos are that percentage of um our kiddos are participating and then um and then our 12th graders and forgive me I don't know why the two green pieces are still on there.

You have to take both, right? Like you can't just take the math.

Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. I don't know why it was like um so can I make kind of a reasonable assumption that the 11th grade results here are more like our true mean? Yeah. Okay.

Absolutely. Because our participation rate Yes. Good observation. Thank you.

for your trend analysis. Um, not every kiddo wants to participate in the um, Were you about to say something?

I was just circling the 25 point drop in 12th grade math. That's a big one.

Um, not every child wants to participate in a standardized assessment. Um, not every family finds this, you know, of high relevance or, you know, um, it it might not be that, you know, they're right. Some of them are right. Some of them this is not the the thing they need. Um, I personally standardized assessment.

This makes me so uncomfortable because like there are so many other ways to measure and demonstrate mastery and growth.

These are the pieces that get on the state dashboard that we get measured up against that do have a predictive quality um statistically. So like this is um it's real and it's um not why we do what we do but it's there science.

This is a tricky one. Okay. Because the state transition to next generation science standards a little bit late in the next generation science standard game and didn't offer districts a lot of support in doing that. Um this assessment also measures sciences in an interdisiplinary matter which means that at every grade level at which science is measured um fifth 8th and 11th three times in a child's educational journey not with the same assessment if you're a child in that journey in this state um added deltas all over the place um then you are taking an Earth, life, and physical science assessment that also contains engineering components in the physical sciences. So, you're taking an interdisciplinary science assessment. In elementary school, that has typically been our approach, but oftent times in schools, it becomes departmentalized as early as middle school. Right? So then if you're taking an assessment that is interdisciplinary, but you're learning in a in a in a discrete sciences coursework sequence, this is not aligned to measure what's actually happening in your classroom environment. So I really want to cautious caution us looking at these data that we're not too heavy in our judgment on what it's showing us because we are doing a lot of really good work in science and it's really hard to demonstrate on this particular assessment. Could I just come up for a second?

Might need some positivity from Tom.

Um well you're you're not going to get it because I'm just No, not you Tom. Ted, Ted, we need test.

I'm just going to be blunt. This is not a good assessment, especially at the high school level. And again, this means absolutely zero to the kids on an individual basis.

They're pulled out of class. They have a they miss a bunch of class time to take an assessment that is not really well calibrated to what science actually means.

Um, I would take it with a grain of salt. Thanks, But it does appear on the state dashboard. It does. So, um this is um how we do.

I've seen a lot worse, less positive.

It's not head level positivity, but Okay.

So, from an education standpoint, sorry. Yes.

What can you do to change a ridiculous assessment? Not much.

Well, I mean, can we lobby our local legislature to be like, "Hey, what's going on with this thing?" So I have um had the opportunity to participate in uh requests for proposal with the state with our state assessments both in the sciences and the math and the reading and all of these different instruments.

I have been at those tables. It is driven by federal compliance.

we can we can grab a better assessment, but it's the federal compliance pieces that are really at the end of the day kind of telling us what we can and can't do, which runs sort of up against what we know is best. Often, um, for example, the main throughear assessment kind of locks in on at, below, or above. It's only looking to determine if our kids are at grade level below or above. Not really concerned with well where are they and how much do they need to grow and like what would be most it's like not asking those questions our traditional use of noia we do that. So that's why I'm asking us to stay in the realm of like our traditional use of noia we can take that three-digit score we can disagregate it into all the areas of learning in that content area and we can take action in our multi-tered systems of support. the main three-year data doesn't offer us that information. That's not what we need to lean into.

Um, with science, um, it will probably be back up for proposal and we will probably be at the table having very similar conversations. Um, like takes advocacy.

I don't know that the state loves having afraid to say it's terrible. Please keep sitting at the table.

It's an important place. Yeah.

And while you're there, ask them where the money for the CDS is. Um, I think Laura has questions. Um, with regard to that, um, if you give us some insight into, um, when we're looking at this data, how reflective it is of student ability and student achievement versus how closely the curriculum matches to what the test is testing.

Great question. Okay. Um, all of these data sets that you have just seen are aligned to the common core state standards for math and ELA.

Um, I'm saying generically ELA because some of them are specifically reading.

um our programs largely that we have adopted I mean as far as I can tell are aligned with the exception so far is all of our sciences are not aligned right because our sciences we have to transition we would have to transition everybody to a fully interdisciplinary model to meet this expectation. Um, that's not to say that the work that we're doing isn't next generation science standard aligned. I we're purchasing those resources. We are doing that PD, but it isn't lining up to the assessment and the assessment doesn't drive what we it really doesn't um this is a byproduct of an assessment need that we have. Um that said, our getting clear about what are those at every grade level expectations is a next level of work per what per the assessed standards. So like getting really clear about that. Um, the programs are doing a good job of lifting a lot of that and the assessments are obviously measuring it, but us gaining additional clarity on some of those end of year expectations is the next level of work. Did that answer your question?

Here's a pretty happy one.

Oh, it the line makes it look bad, but it's actually really really good compared to um what you know some other districts are facing. These are scales.

Everything is above 98.

Yeah. I mean some districts hover below 90 consistently. Below 90. Yeah. The state average is 88% I think.

Yeah. So go us. Yeah. Here we are headed. Greet science. Oh, we'll just graduate anyway.

Um, so co years definitely impacted graduation rates. The main state diploma factors into this. There's a lot of stuff happening behind the scenes. I am I serve on our boost uh committee at the high school. Like this is really we lean into this work as a district. This is taken really seriously. It was one of the first meetings that I attended here.

I was really proud to be part of that team. So we do good work in this area.

Yeah. Yeah, I mean this is one where we have had, you know, principles and and superintendent like reaching out to families like, "How can we get you what you need to get done and and to the point where you can you can graduate on time?" I mean, I don't know. I don't know if that happens in every district, but I think it's really cool that I will say that I'm very impressed with how it happens here. Yeah. Chris, um, do we have data on like a secondary education rate? like how many of our kids go to college or how many of our kids go to technical schools.

I don't have it in this presentation, but we do have that. We we track things um like how many kids engage early in dual and concurrent enrollment. We track obviously advanced placement participation. Um we do um the once they metriculate it's harder to follow.

Um data sharing is not simple. They're not sub 18 years old. their engagement is critical in that process at that point. So if you pull the um previous the data scorecard presentation, it's always the second meeting in January, I believe.

Um you you can see some of that data is in there and I do have it in our comprehensive needs assessment that we do every year as well. So if that's something of interest, I'm sure. and maybe it would be appropriate to have the high school here that a couple of demographic pieces that I think um would be relevant to know going into the school year.

Our multilingual learner population trend uh that number is as of this week.

So I did say most of the data was end of year last year. I followed this into this year for the purpose of planning.

And then another data point um is the trend of um McKini Vento. Those are students who have um demonstrated a need to insecure housing.

And that is that is all I have on my sort of quickly assembled data over.

Thank you. Erica questions. I know we were peppering with questions while she went along.

Is that sort of the the the high numbers at the beginning of this chart? Are those the um the new mayors in our district?

Yes.

Uh well, some of them were. Yeah, for sure.

Yes. So, once they moved, they had the ability to continue to come to Freeport Armor Panel. Oh, mostly Freeport um through the end of the following year. Right. That's how Mckin Vento.

So, Mckin Vento is determined best meets best interest of a child.

Best interest of the child determination is made. it's done on a case-by case basis. Um, high schoolers, we really want to support them persisting in the environment in which they started high school if possible. Sometimes that's not possible.

Um, I just wanted to say thank you so much for this data. that's just really um insightful or provokes a lot of insight I think as Tom likes to likes to say a lot of questions um and I guess I'm wondering based on this if either or both of you have thoughts about um work going forward and I guess I'm thinking a little bit um to our conversation that we had committee meeting this morning where we got a little bit of a preview of this and had a little bit more conversation about that that maybe might like to hear a little bit.

Um shall I take a I'll follow you.

Okay. So um last year um probably across the year there was a call for um from our staff to look at our math programming. So that is a starting place that was recognized last year. Um we have convened that committee. We have started that work. It is a research-driven, research-rich like engaged process at this point where we are not specifically looking at materials. We are talking about like what is the um what are those grade level expectations? What are the pathways we need to be offering to kiddos to get more kiddos across that line of career and college readiness? Um where does it start? How far upstream?

What are the interventions? multi-tered systems of support early often you know um so yes that was pro that was initiated last year with the math programming committee I have worked with um our building administrators at the end of the year and um we looked at what does it mean for recognizing those endofear expectations in the form of standards articulated to the same ones that are assessed so that work is underway as Did that answer your question?

Any other questions?

I think the only thing I'd like to add to respond to your question is I I haven't had time yet to dig into the curriculum very deeply. Um, when I look at data like this, where my mind and soul have always gone is all the things that that data doesn't show us. It does not show us how our kids write lab reports. It doesn't show us how many of our kids are artists. It doesn't show how many of our kids can work with other kids to solve a problem. And on and on and on. when I think about the the attributes of learning that for me personally are the most valuable, those are the things that I I fall back on. And so I would just encourage us to consider to continue to look at the data points that Erica has so thoughtfully put together and consider what all the other things that we want our kids getting out of school that would not show here.

It's just one of the reasons I really appreciate the sort of the extracurricular page and the the activities and the groups and because that all kind of plays into that these are numbers on a page. Yes. But it doesn't tell the full story.

Absolutely. I think that also um leads into our strategic planning too and the metrics that we choose will be really important to show achievement and progress my brain like after 9:00.

Um, I just wanted to add that I um I know we'll have our committee reports later, but that I was really impressed when we met this morning with Erica to talk about to to take a look at this and um talk about curriculum and the plans that are in place around the math curriculum. So, I think I just wanted to share that, you know, if you have community members watching who are looking at this data and wondering about it. Um um I feel that we have a really strong plan in place to um move forward with a math curriculum that meets our students needs and improve um achievement in the future. So um I just wanted to share my appreciation and confidence in that and say we have just a really great insightful presentation to the members of curriculum committee about that this morning.

Thank you.

Can I just ask uh one more thing? Um thank you so much Eric. This was really this was awesome. Um is it fair to say that um when the board is presented with the budget request in January, January, um that um we could have a conversation then about whether any of the whether any of the gaps or um that are identified here um are in any way kind of addressed from a budgetary perspective. um in terms of um either cuts or additional um monies um which would then leave us with I guess the knowledge that at least within the next year or so anything that we're trying to do in terms of meeting some of these um uh responding to some of these this information um is happening um just with existing budget and with existing staffing and with existing curricula that we have purchased etc. Is that a fair thing to say?

Thank you Erica. Made you stand for a long time.

All right. Um board comments and committee reports. So board information exchange agenda requests.

Anything anybody wanted to share? Danielle?

Um, so I'll share a little bit about the curriculum meeting that we had today. So I agree with Mora. It was a great meeting um with Erica and um Anna was there as well and I think we came up with a really good work plan of um great things that we're going to um address throughout the year with the math being on there is a big one and the budget of course of what we need to do to support that. Um and in the past we've always met just twice um a year. We have monthly meetings now that have already been set up all the way through June.

Um, and the public can obviously join um to listen, but I'm very excited about it. Um, it was it was really a great uh great start I think to the meeting. So, thank you Erica for everything. Wonderful. Thank you.

Any other Yeah. Um, I wanted to ask again about um the opportunities for movement, just making sure that didn't fall off our radar that had been in our last strategic plan. I know we had conversations around following up on that. And I know that Tom and Erica don't have a lot of other things going on, so we've got plenty of time to do this. Um but I just wanted to remind the board that um in our prior strategic plan we had not addressed the opportunities for movement that had arisen. So um and I think there's been some great work done like um at Mass Landing they walk a mile every day which is fabulous. like I love that my son gets an extra mile of exercise a day and Emily has come and told us about all the positive impacts of that and um just wanted to remind us of that and then think like wonder if there's some learning that could come from massing I think we just shared and opportunities throughout the district it's a good point around you know I I think I think a most of the big pillars from the last strategic plan had been talked about addressed not dealt with, but because some of it will continue forever, right? But um but that was I think one of the big areas that didn't that really didn't get um maybe the attention we had hoped.

I don't think it's due to the fault of anybody. It's just there was so many things going on and um and it's a good it's a good call out to make sure you know well one is it are there other things from the original strategic plan that are still important to us that we want to try and make sure we continue to capture and work towards or maybe our philosophy has changed on things and you know sitting at desk for eight hours way to go. Um no absolutely not. Um, so yeah, thank you. Thank you for that call out and I would encourage all the folks that are working on the strategic plan um to keep those types of things in mind. Danielle, I was wondering if we could circle back and talk about the start times of schools. Again, I know that's been brought up by the community. Um, and I think Jean did a little bit of work on that, but you know, we got busy with the strategic plan. So, I didn't know if that was something that we could get back together with obviously our schools that we do region 10 with, but something that we could talk about again.

There there Erica and I just went to a Drummond Wood legislative update extravaganza last week in Augusta. Um, and one of the items that they they brought to our attention is that there is actually that was a resolution by the legislature for districts to explore that issue. So that's that's been brought up for sure.

Yeah, it was one of those things that because of region 10, we really all all three districts would have to be on on the same page to make that happen. And there was some initial like, yeah, we're interested in considering that. And then when we were like, "All right, let's consider it." They're like, "Oh, no, no, not die now." So, uh, yeah, just in the spirit of, you know, don't let it just die. Um, continue that conversation.

Yes. Um, I was wondering if we could hear from Kelly at some point in time soon about um the health insurance options that I know the the gentleman who's come and mentioned at various times. Um, if there was any opportunity for cost savings and that or if that just wasn't something you could pursue or I think at some point we said, "Oh, we'll look into it and hear back." But I was just wondering when we'd be able to hear back. Um, I think he had a very specific request to for us to seek a bunch of claims data from our from our insurance company. Um, and I don't think we've I don't think we've done that. Um I thought that he was maybe I misunderstood but he was suggesting we look at other yeah he basically said if you can give me all that claims data I can get you a number was my understanding of of the conversation. Um and you know as members of that trust we would be entitled to that information whereas an individual insurance broker would not. So I think that was the request. I don't know um I know for um this is probably this is probably a finance committee question and certainly you know we we publish those um agendas as well and we could certainly make you know make sure you're aware of it if you're interested in hearing more about the health insurance fees. I don't know how it um obviously there's contractual obligations with our our contract says I think we actually list the the program we use now or similar right so there is I think some flexibility if we found something that was materially similar um we could switch it um but what I don't know is where we are in a contract as it relates to ability to put it out to bid I know we've had this conversation about the property and manage uh property and casualty insurance like you have to tell them by July 1st if you plan to go out to bid in the next year. Right. So, I don't know if this it's similar to the health insurance or not. Um but certainly something we can put on our finance um we're working on our finance work plan as well. So, thank you for that.

Yeah. Um, just in addition to that, it seems like we had a conversation on the finance committee last year that we were going to look into other districts and what they were using just to compare.

And I'm not really sure what kind of work has been done towards that end yet, but that was part of the conversation back then around the health insurance. Sure.

Yep.

Um also I think just to be clear or at least to clarify my understanding we did not make any commitment to any particular individual or company to evaluate something so that uh that individual's company would be evaluated as the sole other option other than what we are looking at. Oh, absolutely.

What I recall we agreed to would be more along the lines of what Kelly was just suggesting of just understanding a bit more what are our options um so that if there is uh a local company that is interested in um in bidding um that they understand um what that landscape looks like. So just to clarify that it's not we're not providing we're not looking to provide any particular information to any particular company right now.

Absolutely. Yeah. I mean something like a insurance that is that would clearly be covered by our policy around you know sending major things out to bid um with a very clear laid out process on what that looks like um how many different providers it goes out to etc. Thank you for the clarification.

You guys are chatty about board information at 9:35. Anything else?

All right, I'm gonna throw it to Kelly for facilities and operations. I feel barely coherent at this point.

All right, so we had a meeting on September 10th and there were a number of items discussed at that meeting.

Uh first of all, Glenn, talk to us about the new leech field that has been installed at Panel and uh it is at now at completion.

So good job for getting that done. Um just to kind of go over some of the numbers, they did have to remove swing sets in order to install the leote and level the ground. So they had to install some new ones. that added a little bit to the cost, but the whole entire project still came in well under the $450,000 that we authorized from capital reserves. So, um that is good news.

Um update on phase one projects. Um there was a very extensive list, some of which are completed, some of which are still in progress. Um the lighting project, we are still waiting on the status on materials and that's kind of the big hold up there, but we're hoping to get started on replacing our lights in the buildings midocctober perhaps.

Um Glenn Reynolds also gave us an update on the vehicle and grounds equipment replacement.

Um, there was a number of pieces that were purchased over the summer, um, including a 2025 F354 pickup, a John Deere mower, a couple of, um, mowers that were swapped out for something that is not going to be available for 2020 until 2026. So, there's a little bit of change, but overall, we're still well on budget.

Um update on requests for proposal for the tennis courts. There's definitely a big push to try to get our tennis courts replaced as soon as possible. We do recognize the need to have that work done quickly. And so at this point in time, we Glenn is working on putting together and sending out the RFP for the engineering work, which is the first step that needs to happen. um so that we understand the scope of work that needs to be done for the tennis court replacement. So that's that's on on his list of things to do and may have actually already pinned in by now.

And finally, the big piece here is the turf field update. Um our field maintenance supervisor Jason Chisel gave the committee update on the status of the turf field and the track. And the short version is that we are on year eight of this track and field. It feels like just yesterday that was a brand new track and field, but it is already year eight. We are already out of warranty.

And um we are already looking at needing to make sure that we are in compliance with the concussion standards and making sure that our um that our turf is is um safe for our players. So, we're we're looking at maintenance um plans to help us to reach anticipated lifespan of another 4 to 6 years safely before we have to do a full replacement of the turf, which will be quite costly. We want to push that off as far as possible um obviously, but that does mean that we're going to um make sure that we're doing yearly testing to to ensure that that's safe. And apparently that has just been completed, the GMAX testing, and we did pass. So, we're doing well um for now, but we are keeping an eye on what needs to happen to make sure that that still remains safe for our players.

Um we do know that there are portions of the turf edge that are collapsing and need maintenance right away um to ensure that they are safe and they're draining properly. Um as of the moment when this meeting was happening, that was an estimated $10,000.

Um, in addition in addition to that, they estimated that there would be another 9,000 needed to restripe the track. So, um, I think we do have an update from Michelle. They have actual better numbers on that now and she'll give us an update on that shortly, but we will be needing some money from our capital reserve fund to fund this work on the track and field that will be happening hopefully next month.

I'm sorry, Kelly. You said that was for the the stripes on the track and then also replacing the Nike grind.

Uh, no, that will that that is actually for some curbing, some collapse edging that's kind of around the edge of the track that's going to need to be repaired and that is something that has to happen right away.

Okay. And the this thing where it says it's losing its pliability, could you explain what that what the Nike Grind is? I'm assuming Okay. So, yeah. So, the Nike Grind is um like a kind of a ground up shoe sle material that goes underneath the turf to keep it soft and cushioned for the players if they once they hit the ground. Um, and that has over the course of the eight years sort of started to dry rot. So, it's not kind of doing its job as well as it used to. But the way it's explained to us by Jason is there's also a cushioned pad underneath the Nike grind that still does some of that work.

Um, still keeps up absorbs impact. So that Nike brand will need to be replaced, but there is a plan to put something to kind of use something else to kind of give it get us by until we have to do a complete replacement.

Okay. So it's not included in the cost, but as you said, this it was tested for safety and Yes, that that is not included in the striking and the curving cost and it's not something we're looking to do right away.

Yeah, it's several hundred,000.

It's it's it's changed a lot in the eight years since we put it in at that point. The desire of the district was to go with the Nike grind because it was uh virgin rubber pellets as opposed to a lot of other turfs at the time were using groundup tires which has the metal from being a tire at some point in its life. Um which leeches up metals and it's there was safety concerns and so at the time um Nike Grind was the option to not have to use the tires. Um so which was I I still think was a good one. Um, you know, it was a relatively new product, so there wasn't, you know, 8 years of of data on how it would hold up. Um, you know, our expectation on the track was 10 to 15 years uh when we did this. Uh, I can't I almost fell out of my chair when he said we were in year 8.

Um, I too think it thought it was yesterday. Um, but uh so there are other there are newer materials now that are options. Um, so that are not quite as awesome.

Yeah, I think the way it was explained to us is that when we get kind of close to not passing that GMAX testing, um, there is a material that's similar or the same material as the pad underneath that we can sort of use to fill in to get us back to that um, above the GMAX testing limit until it's just absolutely necessary for us to pull everything out.

Right? to replace the the grass, what looks like grass, the turf, and then the infill. So, the Nike Grind is the infill. All the little any anybody who's had a kid who plays out there, the little black pieces that come home in their socks, that's Nike Grind. Um, and you know, when it first went in, it kind of looked like little like rubber pieces, and now if you pull it out, it looks more like little rocks.

It's just less pliable.

Yeah. So, is this something we should be saving for? Starting to save now. Do you have a reserve account?

Uh, we do have a reserve account for the track and field set up. Um, I mean, I don't think at the current save rate cuz it has varied a few times over how much we've um uh put in it each year. Um, it also is set up to replace the track um which um has generally has a longer lifespan than the turf. The turf is usually about 10 years. The track is usually about 20 years. Um, but I would say that um, while we are putting money aside, we are not putting aside at a rate that we would be able to fully fund a full redo of the turf in four to six years. Is that fair to say, Kelly? Yeah. Uh, at the end of this year, 280,000.

Yeah, we have 280,000 at the end of this year.

And how much was it? Uh, well, the full I mean, it's not really fair to say we would have because we I mean, we have a $600,000 retaining wall that we wouldn't need to redo. Like, there's a lot of parts that wouldn't need to be redone.

So, I couldn't tell you how much just the the carpet, if you will, and the infill was, but we'll get those numbers sooner than they Any other questions, Erica?

All right. uh policy call. Uh thanks so much. So on um June 11th, the policy committee met for our first um meeting. We met via Google uh meet online as we um as we do we meet virtually. Um the I'll give abbreviated summary of our um activities. It was a longer meeting, but I'll give an abbreviated version of that. Um the the core that really we were um uh uh Erica was u kind enough to invite April Perkins who's the director of multilingual programs um for the South Portland schools and formerly the main state director for multilingual programs um to come and just talk to the committee a bit about um legal statutory requirements um regarding ESOL um and how those relate to um our existing policies uh board policies um which are uh IHVA the program for multilingual learners is what is where that is um currently housed um and also how that relates um to our requirement to have a loud plan. Um so we had a very helpful conversation about that. there was no action that was taken on that and there was no there was no revisions made um to that but we're going to be continuing to explore um uh both IHPA and also the and its relationship to the the required lab plan as well. Um we are uh um Tom did a amazing amount of work to to generate um a uh work plan that we're we're continuing to look at to to see how we're going to approach um addressing both the uh I mean you alluded to the um how did you call it extravaganza? Extravaganza.

Yeah. extravaganza that you went to to understand the um the uh legal changes um that we need to make sure that we address from a policy perspective. Um as well as um making as big a dent as we can um in our um log of uh regular uh 5-year um on average uh review um of our existing policies. Um, we did spend some time also talking about uh policy JIC K um bullying. Um, and it notes on the for anyone following along at home um or for you here at the table um it notes here that we that I'm I made a motion to to bring that policy as we had discussed it to the board. Um but we um as we uh do uh sent the policy to um to council and they had some additional thoughts that we're going to be taking into consideration um at our next uh committee meeting. So that is not we're not bringing that before you tonight. Um there's also a list of other um policies that uh were tabled. Um I'm not going to list those, but just to say we have our work cut out for us this year. Um but we're very uh looking forward to getting the work done and very um glad to have um Tom as our uh leazison to the administration uh to work with us on that. So we'll take any questions. Um how many policies total are you thinking you're going to need to update because of legal stuff or just up?

I haven't gotten that number yet, but Tom, um there's quite a few. Um, so well, Colin, you were extremely gracious and I appreciate it. Um, I did start out with high hopes of developing developing an ambitious work plan to get through a just kind of a backlog of policies that should be reviewed. Um, I'm going to have to rethink that because we we it there's a lot of work to do. Um, but I can tell you some of the important new policies and based on new statutes that have just come out that we're going to have to prioritize.

Like, um, there's a new law on the restraint and seclusion language in schools. That means we need a new policy. There's a new law about temperature guidelines in schools, which will require us to have a policy. Um, I can't remember anymore off the top of my head, but I walked out of there with a manual of a whole bunch of things tagged for policy. So, yeah, we we've got a lift, right? And I think but also just to I mean again, it will be there is there will be labor involved in that. But just to be clear that that is also why we have a lawyer um who is who is who are they are experts uh in this. So, we're not going to be working from um just our blank piece of paper, a blank piece of paper or just from our like gut sense of maybe how we should change them. Um we're going to be working with the advice of and and uh copy that we're going to be getting draft language. We're really getting um from uh both and also from uh MSMA as a way to understand um kind of what is recommended in response to those policy changes. Um we are I mean I will say that um we do have on our radar just for everyone we do have on our radar the question of the cell phone policy. Um we are required by I'm trying to remember the date that we have to have it done by July July 1. We're required to have a cell phone policy. So, we will before July 1 um be bringing a cell phone policy uh before this board um that may or may not address any of the um questions that have arisen around changes we might make to our actual uh protocol when you say it that way. Um but we are also will kind of remain kind of um kind of keep assessing as we go forward and then we have the different meetings over the next couple the presentations over the conversations over the next couple of months um how much we might um I don't know kind of where we might move that in in the process or or what kind of work we have to do because that would probably be one where we would have we would have draft language we could we could borrow from other districts but we would have to make it a little more more bespoke. depending upon what we decide to do. Um, does that answer your question?

Thank you. Okay. Thank you.

As Colin mentioned, we don't have any policies for review tonight. Um, so we will move on to new business. Um, just two quick things. I'm actually going to go out of order. I'm going to go 13B. Um, as Kelly mentioned, uh, when we were meeting with Glenn and Jason, um, about the track and field needs, um, there was some, uh, um, urgency around trying to get, um, the repairs done around the edge of the track to prevent more almost a collapse in sections. So, uh, they are safe to be using. They were using them tonight. Um, but it's really uh preventative to avoid um more expensive repairs down the road, which um Jason thinks would would likely happen if we do nothing. Um, so there was a request and as Kelly mentioned, um it's kind of two parts. It's it was $9,000 for the restriping of, you know, the lines that go around the track and then um originally we thought it was about $12,000 for that curbing. We have since gotten bids um and the uh recommended bid is is a bit higher once they came in and actually looked at what the specific work that needs to be done.

Um so I'm going I'm looking for um a motion for consideration and approval to expend up to $28,000 for maintenance of the track and field from the capital reserve fund. I have a motion for that and we can talk about Thank you, Kelly and Chris. Um yeah, so that 28 would cover our actual um bid prices for for both of those pieces and they could um our understanding is both of them could be done before the winter gets here um to protect that asset.

Anybody have any other questions on that piece? I just want to be just because we're coming up on 10 and that is an actual vote and I want to make sure we get to that in case you all vote no that you want to leave before we get to it.

I'm making you decide. Um, all right. No other questions than all of Oh, yeah.

Um, this striping is that just the one like we didn't put it out to bid or just one company or uh I believe there was two two bids for the striping there. I I had people that do it. So, um, some of the stuff is a little specialized, but yeah. And just because of the dollar size. So, our policy requires things over a certain threshold have to go out to bid and it's a public bid and a public opening and all those fun things. things under a threshold. I want to say it's 50,000 25,000. Double. It depends on what it is.

Yeah. Right. Okay. Um so this one wouldn't have required sort of a full bid process anyway. I don't believe. But um we did get a couple of quotes um just as is prudent. Um and that and that was the price that came in. Good question. That's good.

I'm ready. All right. All those in favor?

Great. None opposed. Uh the only other thing that we have on the agenda for this evening other than public comment for all the folks in the crowd um is the MSMA fall conference registration form.

So in your packets is the pink page. Uh the um the 2-day conference is in Augusta at the Civic Center on the 23rd and the 24th of October. I highly encourage folks to attend. Uh if you would like to go um just let uh Jimmy know by the 3rd, which is next Friday, that you'd like to attend and she will get you signed up and the district will cover the cost for you. Um on the back of that page is just sort of a preliminary list of the offerings. So you can see there's, you know, things from legal discussions about, you know, collective bargaining to first amendment rights in public meetings to AI in schools. there is a wide variety of topics that they cover. Um and uh you will you will not walk out of there without learning a great deal and the um the keynote speaker uh which is always the first morning um is always really really good. Um so I unfortunately will not be there this year. I am in Denver that weekend. Well, good. So you can go hang out with Tom and I imagine Erica's probably going as well. Um, yeah, particularly for new board members, I highly encourage if you can make it work, even if you can only make one of the two days work because of work scheduled, kids scheduled, whatever it might be, I think it's still worthwhile.

Um, so if you can go, please let Jenny know by next Friday. Do you know if Ted's going to be there?

Uh, Ted left. Yeah, echo that. I think, yeah, I mean, if you can possibly go even for half a day, um, go. It's just it uh as I think I was saying maybe to Valerie that I think just being in a space where you're surrounded by people who are doing nothing but thinking about schoolboard things and all are sort of on that same frequency is just a real benefit to just being in that space um uh for a couple of hours. So I really highly recommend going it's a great point. In addition to all of the the actual clinic offerings, it's really good networking with other board members. So basically folks that go are board members and superintendents and assistant superintendents typically who you're going to find. So the coolest people the coolest people around obviously.

All right. Any questions on that? If you have specific questions feel free to reach out. Happy to happy to answer any questions that I can. Um all right then. Uh not seeing anyone here for public comment but I'll pause.

All right. I would take a motion to adjourn.

Everyone knows that. I think it was Steph and Anna. All those in favor? Great.

958. Thank you.

============================================================

RSU5 BOARD OF DIRECTORS MEETING TRANSCRIPT
Meeting Date: October 08, 2025
Source File: transcript_2025-10-08_zRT6zR_aXc8.txt
District: Regional School Unit 5 (Freeport, Durham, Pownal, Maine)
============================================================

[Music] we discuss. But let's get started with the pledge of allegiance.

Okay. Do I have a motion for consideration and approval of the minutes from the September 24th, 2025 meeting as presented by errors or omissions?

Thank you, Chris. Second. All those in favor?

Wonderful. Opposed uh adjustments to the agenda. So, I think we are going to add one adjustment. We're going to add a 12B uh under unfinished business and we're going to use that opportunity to um to appoint someone to the policy committee because Danielle is going to step away from that policy committee. So, we will uh we'll make that happen uh under 12B.

But we will get started first with uh good news and recognition of board representative.

Oh, okay. Here we go.

So, I'll keep it brief because our wonderful principal go and vice principal over here and I'm sure will share so many different things. But, um, last week we had all of our homecoming games, which all went super well, and our homecoming dance, which is always very fun. Um, the DJ was really good this year if anyone is wondering.

Today in advisory, we did some anti-bullying activities which hopefully everyone saw our chains of kind messages and our posters out in the walls cuz it is bullying awareness month I believe.

Um the student leadership committee went to the Root Institute for Nor Eastern and Portland to meet with other similar teams from other schools in Maine. Um, and we've kind of hit the ground running and we can't wait to share about what we have decided to focus on for this year.

Playoffs are coming up for almost all of our sports teams. So, definitely keep updated on those. You can find the game times on the football athletics website.

And finally, this week we will be having elections for the school board rep position, which I'm sad to say we made the decision to not run this year. Um, but I know that whoever will be in my spot is going to do so amazing and I'm excited to help with that transition while I'm still here in the building.

But yeah, that's the go.

See what happens. Jenny, we move her away from Colin and now she's not doing it anymore.

Thank you, Phoebe. Uh, I think I can speak for everyone when I say we're sad that you won't be joining us, but we know you will be back here at least two times with the leadership committee to present to us. So, um, you will you will not be forgotten and uh, we're So, will this be your last meeting then? Oh, I think people would have changed their plans if they knew that and they all would have been here.

Well, thank you for 2 years on the board. Um, you've been a wonderful addition. Your willingness to raise your hand in a room full of sometimes difficult people, I mean us, um, has been commendable and admirable and I I have no doubt you will go off to do wonderful things. I also I almost sent this to the board and maybe I still will if I can find it. Um I don't know if folks saw there was a PSA that was done that Phoebe was um was was a part of about u mental health and it was wonderful and thank you for that work that you do too. So I know you have a lot of things on the plate so I understand. Yeah. Well, thank you everyone. and I've learned so much and I hope I've been a good liaison from the students and I definitely totally will be back also probably sending you guys emails and doing everything. But yeah, it's I think I I am just excited to help whoever's next transition in while I'm still here cuz I have kind of as far as a high schooler goes been a bit of a grandpa here. Um, so I'm excited to see who's next and I saw the people on the ballot and it's going to be an awesome awesome year. So don't worry, I'm leaving you guys in good hands.

Well, thank you, Phoebe. Um, I can also concur from the child at my house that the DJ was incredible. So good. And I also think I don't know if this happens often or never, but I believe last week every one of the homecoming games, every team won, which I know it's not all about winning, but that's a great week to do it. So anyway, thank you, Phoebe. And I know we'll be hearing from you again when we move on to the cell phone discussion.

All right, so we will move on to public comment. If we have anyone who would like to speak, we just ask that you come up to the microphone, share your name and the town you live in, and you have three minutes to share.

It it it's okay. You don't worry about it. We're going to get her name. I mean, not that my name is long letters, both front and first and last. Um, hi, my name is Annie Wear. I'm the ones that's been emailing you about all the tech stuff and I just want to come out of the gate saying I'm actually really judicious in what I'm sending you guys because I guess get flooded with stuff.

Um because I'm part of a turn the tide coalition as well which is a group of uh community members in all over southern Maine. We've al come together to kind of just think a little bit more thoughtfully about how we're giving technology to our kids and presenting it. So tonight, since cell phones is on the agenda, I thought I'd talk about that. So I have two fourth graders, they're twins, and a sixth grader at Durham Community School. And as I said, I'm the co-founder of the RSU5 Alliance for Thoughtful Technology. Um, first of all, I want to thank you guys so much for putting cell phones on the agenda tonight and just this fall to begin the conversation or rather keep the conversation going across Maine and across the country at large. More districts and states are adopting what we're calling bellto bell or away for the day phone policies. Just in Maine this year we have Mount Ararat, Bath, Portland, Windham, Turner, Levit, Oxford Hills, Poland, Chevus, York, Camden, Rockport, etc., etc. going bell-to-bell and the reports are good. Why are they doing this? Because classroom only bans aren't working. When 77% of our teachers here at the high school here in Freeport express concern, that's a footnote. Not a footnote rather, it's a signal. A signal for help. A national poll published just yesterday polling 20,000 educators identified phone-f free policies as best practice, leading to significant academic, social, and emotional gains. And not to mention, the largest finding was higher teacher satisfaction and retention. And think about it. Many teachers, even those with up to 10 years experience, have never known a phone-free school. I taught for 10 years, but it's been 12 since I've been in the classroom. You guys do the math. Figure out my age. And let me tell you, the classrooms and the schools are kind of unrecognizable to me. It's just incredibly different.

So, will there be push back from students if we do this here in RSU5? Of course, there's going to be resistance.

But that resistance isn't proof of the policy is wrong. It's proof that devices have a powerful hold.

It's a bit like taking a slot machine out of the cafeteria, right? If you remove something designed to keep people hooked, they'll protest at first. But like gambling or smoking restrictions, short-term discomfort often leads to long-term relief and healthier habits. A lot of us are parents in here and we go through this all the time and it's hard.

The good news is that we don't have to reinvent the wheel. Proven models, cost-effective vendors, and clear implementation plans already exist. And I encourage you all to attend the MSMA conference later this month where two sessions focus on cell phone policy and implementation from people who are doing it now. It's not just vendors trying to push their product on you guys. The real question isn't if we move forward with belltoell a wave for the day phone free policy. It's when and how. The time is now to create a clear plan and timeline to make it happen thoughtfully, collaboratively, and urgently.

My ask tonight as a parent who is not pushing back on you all to do this because I know sometimes that's the fear is that the parents are going to push back. There's a lot of us out there part of the RSU5 alliance. We have over 200 people and those are just the people that have actually taken the time to think about it.

Um, we're asking you to keep the belltobell phone free policies on the front burner and we'd like you to launch a clear process this fall. Include student and teacher voices. It's important that we're all in this together and take steps towards a consistent district-wide policy. Not just the middle school, not just smart watches at one particular elementary school, but districtwide. Let's be a community. We're an RSU. This isn't about control. It's about care. It's about creating schools where attention, connection, and equity are paramount.

Let's give our students the gift of presence with an away for the day phone policy. And so, I thank you guys so much for your time. Thank you, Hinnie.

Amy's from Durham. I don't know if she said that at the beginning, but All right.

I don't see anyone else rushing the microphone, but there will be another opportunity for public comment at the end. So, I encourage folks. Um, all right. So, we will move on to item eight on our agenda, which is the report from the superintendent.

Good evening, everybody. Can you hear me? Okay. Okay. Well, since the last board meeting, we've had some very productive weeks. Um, I have a few updates tonight, mostly about the CDS transition process. Um, I also want to talk about our strategic planning work and the budget listening sessions that I've been engaging in in the schools.

So, you will recall from our last meeting that I and Erica, Assistant Superintendent Mateo, and uh Ted Dalton, who is an early childhood administrator in another district who's been helping us out with this, presented information to you about our respons upcoming responsibility to assume um Childfind and FAPE, which is free appropriate public education for children ages 3 to five. and that at the latest the latest that we will have to assume this responsibility is July 1st, 2028.

Um we may choose to begin that responsibility in whole or in part before that um with some support from the main department of education.

So since that last meeting we have taken some steps forward and I want to appreciate what those are. So the first you will have seen a letter that went out for me to launch an an early childhood transition task force. The invitation has gone out to staff. It's gone out to community members. We are purposefully seeking a broad range of voices in this task force. There is a lot to think about with this transition because it's a it's a big responsibility. Some of those things include staffing, facilities, budgets, potential partnerships with local child care providers. I I could go on and on. So, in thinking of the way forward, this piece is critical. Um, that group will be put together this month. We are receiving letters of interest already.

Um, this is probably a good time for me to note that one of the hopes for that committee is to have a a board of directors from the school board here from each town. I've received a letter already from Malik who's not here. She's from Powell, but we would still need someone from Durham and from Freeport and of course others from Powell can throw in their hat too if interested.

Um, so we are receiving also letters from staff members and community members. So my hope is to be able to put together that that task force by October 20th, which is when the letters are due, to have its first meeting on the end of the month. Uh and then we'll have one meeting per month right up through the beginning of January, which is when I hope that that task force will be able to present some recommendations to this body um as a way to go forward.

And at that point, we will be heavily engaged in the budget process. So that's hence the timeline for this.

Um I've also been in touch with a lot of people to just become as well informed as possible about what the requirements are and how it's going in other districts, how it's being approached.

I've had conversations the past few weeks with many superintendents in this region, including a meeting that was attend Greater Sebago Education Alliance meeting just this morning that focused specifically on this topic. Um, our partner districts, our neighboring districts are all in various stages.

Some are right where we are. Some are a little bit ahead. Some are a little ahead. Some are maybe even a little bit behind in the process. Um the consistent message that I have heard particularly when I've asked for feedback about the task force is that it's exactly what we should be doing. Um and another common theme that has come up is um a sense of not fully understanding how the state will um fund this going forward. Now that leads me to another point. At our last meeting, um we presented information to you which we had um which was the best advice we had been given at the time and had been run through the district's legal council indicating that after July 1st, 2028, the responsibility of programming costs for the children who are identified with um as having IEPs would revert to the district.

Um Dr. Sandy Flack who is the person with the main DOE who is really the point person on this issue has reached out to me and has pointed out that under the law early childhood special education for ages 3 to five will be 100% state funded even after that point.

Um so that was a topic that was discussed among the superintendents this morning too because that is um this is something the state is trying to make sure that we know but is not fully well fully known at this point. There seems to be a lot of um misunderstanding of this. There are still questions about what that looks like when the time comes. But I'll take it because it's good news. Um even though it's different from what we initially understood.

uh we will continue to seek clarity about what is covered beyond the direct services. That's still a question mark for me. So in other words, what the state is saying is that for every child who is identified, they will continue to support 100% of that child's programmatic costs.

But what that doesn't mean is that if we decide as a district to integrate early childhood into our district, there are systemic costs that can go along with that, not just tagged to each individual child. Those are things that we really need to consider and those costs are not being promised as covered.

Um, again, this is a common question.

So, in other news about this, we have a site visit planned for October 29th, and folks from the DOE are going to do a walkthrough of our facilities to help us envision how we could use the facilities that we already have to meet this need going forward. And that I think will be something that the task force really wants to consider what information we get from that.

Before I go on, maybe it's a good time for me to take questions about the CVS process.

Thank you so much, Tom. That's really helpful information to have. And I'm I'm really glad to hear about the 100% state funding. But I do have to say my immediate um concern or skepticism is the inadequate fun existing special education funding that we get from the state and the federal government and sort of the gaps there in um what they give us and what is actually needed to provide the the level of services that the kids in our district need. So um I guess I'm wondering how they'll ensure that we you know the 100% of the costs are covered. I'm not expecting you to have that answer, but I'm just wanted to say that out loud.

I think it's a great question. Um, I do have a phone call. Well, we as a team have a call scheduled with Sandy Flack tomorrow morning. So, that's certainly a question that I'll ask.

Yeah. I wonder is it, you know, does it fund through the ED279 where they say, "Well, this is what it costs to educate a child, which we know at least in RSU5 is well below what we spend to educate every child in RSU5." I do have a preliminary answer to that because just yesterday Erica and I were at a a conference for new superintendent in which the topic that we were being briefed about is the ED279.

This question came up and the answer that was given was that it's a separate pot of money and so it will be a separate stream of money that had originally been allocated to CDS.

Okay.

So it is in the law that there's a commitment to do this. Now, laws can change. This is 2028. Um, I don't want to be fatalistic about it, and I certainly want to give due credit to the state for wanting to support this and trying to put something together that's really big. Um, but I it's fair to I think these questions are fair.

Any other questions about that? I have a few other things. Carry on.

Okay. So, I just wanted to let you know that we are continuing with the strategic planning process. Um, it is moving on with great energy. The past two weeks has seen a lot of activity around this. We've had focus groups in every town, uh, more than one here in Freeport. We also had a virtual session.

Um, super cool for me to be in those virtual sessions and then encounter former students of mine who now live in Freeport and have kids in our schools.

Um, that's happened more than once now and I just love it. Um, tomorrow.

Do you recognize them or do they recognize you? Well, it I recognized them. Okay. Yeah.

I also had independently of that, just as an aside, I was at Masked Landing last Friday doing the wave as kids were picked up and a former student reached out and said, "Oh my gosh, Mr. Gray, I saw you at out on the P." You know, so that's really nice.

That is very cool. To be fair, you didn't have kindergarteners that you had to figure out what they still look like, too. So, they probably look similar in high school. That's good. Um, tomorrow the strategic planning team meets again in the afternoon and then on Friday is professional learning day. We um we have taken note I want to explain this in a way that really makes sense. We've taken note that the high school has to do NIA accreditation soon. So the one of the major points that we are working on with strategic planning is to develop the portrait of a graduate. Is that the correct term Erica? The vision of a learner. Well, in any case, the NEAS high school accreditation process is also predic predicated on a vision of the graduate. Yeah, that's the whole point really because my whole point is that however we nuance this language, it's really the same thing. And so what we're doing tomorrow uh Friday is we are merging the two processes so that the high school's NEAS work intersects directly with the strategic planning so we don't have to do it again. The high school doesn't have to do that again next year.

That'd be great. Um, so and I have been part of NEASK accreditation quite a few times. Not that I seem to remember the terminology, but I remember the process.

So that's um there's a lot of work happening on strategic planning right now. And I want to give a shout out to Erica Walstrom who has really um worked very hard to facilitate a lot of this work with Grace. And the last thing I wanted to say is that I have been working hard to get out to every school to hear staff members about their priorities and perspectives on the budget. I had the last of those meetings today. It was at Freeport Middle School.

They've been very rich conversations. Um they've been well attended. I've met a lot of people. I've heard a lot of concerns and I've heard a lot of priorities. And I can only think that as we go forward that helps us um be transparent and thoughtful. So that is my update for tonight. And if there are any further questions, I'll be happy to take them.

More.

Thank you again. Um, I did have a question about strategic planning and I know it's pretty soon after that process of getting the input from the community and other stakeholders to reflect on this maybe, but I'm uh wondering about turnout. I know you said the turnout was good, but also how we're feeling about engagement, especially from potentially underrepresented and marginalized groups in our community and um student voices.

And um I know in the past when we've done um certain um efforts to engage stakeholders that sometimes it felt like there was some pieces missing. So I was just wondering if you had an overall thought yet about um how the process went in terms of engaging all the all of folks.

I think that's a great point. I don't have a a breakdown of of disagregated data on that. I can tell you a perception I have is that the folks that I encountered in the at the listening sessions did tend to be pretty well attuned to the schools parents who are are consistently engaged. I also, if I remember correctly, the bulk of the data points that we have are student data, student responses to surveys especially and the focus groups with students that happened both last spring and this fall. So, I think the student voice is well represented and it was purposeful that the staff the staff have done this in PE professional learning time. So the staff voice has definitely been strongly represented.

Thank you.

All right. So we will move on to item nine on our agenda which is administrative reports and we will start with uh the update from the Freeport High School and goal review from Jen Golko.

I have to lower this a little bit. Are you projecting? Yes.

get on here and then I'll get started.

Okay, great. Good evening everybody. I'm Jen Gokle from the high school. It's great to see you all tonight. Um, I am not that tall. Let me see. I'm also really excited that I'm on the agenda twice because that means I get two cookies. Colin knows that. Um, and before I start, I just wanted to briefly say how grateful we are, Phoebe, for your work over the past two years. I have been so fortunate to work with Phoebe all four years. We've got a lot of work to do together this year, but I think you've done an outstanding job.

We've had lots of different school reps who uh schoolboard reps who have done a great job. I think you've done an outstanding job and have taken it seriously and um for those of you who don't know, Phoebe has done a phenomenal job of communicating back out to the um student leadership committee of what the board is talking about and really just having a sense of connecting us uh our school to the board. So, appreciate it very much, Phoebe. I could say more, but I'll stop. Um so I am here tonight to talk a little bit about the progress that we made on our schoolwide goals last year and then talk about the goals that we have um for the year that uh this current year. So as most of you have heard me say in years past, we are really proud of the work that we have done over the past 10 years. This is our 11th year at Freeport High School of having our own strategic plan here. Um this was developed by our faculty leadership teams starting the very first plan that we made was in 2015 and every year we have developed action steps that tie directly to these five overall goals and those action steps guide our work for the year and the action steps that we make each year are based on faculty feedback. They have input into the entire faculty has input into what they think uh where we have made progress and what they think we should focus on for the coming school year. And then we have our faculty leaders both our leadership team and our department chairs weigh in on the action plan for the current year. And so those have been the goals, one of the goals that I have presented to the board each year to talk about which um action steps have been the things that we focused on the most where we feel most proud of the work that we have done and things that we really need to prioritize and push forward into the current year that need continual work or more work. Um so the this is actually the last year of this strategic plan. So, it's good timing as the district strategic plan comes into play and it's always that our plan falls under the umbrella of the district plan.

Um, but it's really guiding our work.

Uh, and so these were the goal. This was the first goal last year was that it was just an overview for the board of the five categories and the action steps.

These are very paired down. You have um in your packet a little bit more detail.

And then we have our full strategic plan that has um much more detailed information about these action steps. So I'll just kind of quickly talk through these pieces that we um focused on last year. Um engaging instruction, the action steps that we set last year. Um one of the things that we focused on that's continuing into this year is really looking at executive functioning skills amongst our students. It's something that we have seen a drastic decline since COVID in students um ability to manage and um engage with their learning um due to some of these pieces of executive functioning, time management, organization, task initiation, um all sorts of things. And so we started focusing on that last year as a whole faculty and it's continued into this year. You'll see that um in the goals that um that I present for for the current year. We established a group that's we call FHACK and yes we have FPAC and F hack. We both might need a new name for that but that's the freshman horizontal alignment committee and that's our ninth grade teachers a selection of them who teach predominantly nth graders and they are starting to align common practices in classrooms. And so you might have heard some other schools where they have a freshman seminar. We don't have a a course like that. And what we're trying to do is align practices amongst teachers. So that process for keeping track of assignments, process for writing down homework, for organizing papers in classrooms, that they're going from room to room and seeing that seems like that should be something that's fairly simple, but usually there's a ton of autonomy in classrooms, which can be really great and ties to a teacher's own style. Um, but there's also a lot of power in commonality and it doesn't mean it looks exactly the same, but that it's predictable for students and that they're building these skills so that as they move into especially junior and senior year, these are things that they're doing on their own. Um, and so that has been a a real focus and will continue to be. We revised our habits of work system last year. We shifted to a one to three scoring. We did a lot of research on that. There was something I had presented to the board and felt that our teachers were struggling with defining a four and what did it look like where we are we have two categories for habits of work um preparedness and engagement. It's basically what you do to be ready for class and what you're doing in class. Um this is paired down from the lower grades where prek to 8 have a different set of criteria and a different scoring. Um overall the feedback has been that that that has gone well. There's still challenges with habits of work at the high school level for sure. We made a decision to take habits of work temporarily out of our co-curricular eligibility as we examine that process and the feedback from that was overwhelmingly positive from both staff and students. Doesn't mean that it won't get back in as we have a committee working on that. Um, but that's something that um we we saw positive feedback from last year. Purposeful assessment. You'll see that u for those of you who have heard me present in years past, these are things that we're constantly working on. Summitive assessments, strong summitive assessments um that are common for teachers of the same course. Um and this year we or excuse me, last year and going into this year, uh we've made a a stronger focus on data analysis. We made so much progress over the years of teachers having common assessments that now really what we're prioritizing is them sitting down looking at the results of those assessments and analyzing how students are doing. Is there adjustments to instruction? Is there adjustments needed to the assessment itself? Is there individual support for um some of the kids that are in that course? So that has been a big piece of the work um and is an ongoing uh process for our our teachers. uh year-long plans is something that we work on. Our goal is for every course to have uh written curriculum of an outline of the standards in the units um that are used in that course. And again, we've made a lot of progress. We're very fortunate that um we support teachers to do a lot of that work in the summertime and they're able to collaborate and really focus on reflecting on the year before and then planning for the year that's coming. Um, for our equity and inclusion action steps, I would say the place we made the most progress was the middle bullet of the equity team's work. We have a subgroup of our leadership team that was uh established 5 years ago.

There are um four faculty members that are on that team and their focus has been for the past two years identifying financial potential financial barriers for any of our students and working to reduce or eliminate those barriers. And so they've done a lot of investigating of where are these hidden costs either in courses or in co-curriculars. Uh so for example, what does it cost to go to the model UN conference? What does it cost to buy cleats to um participate in a sport? What does it cost if you are um participating in the musical? Does it cost anything? And then finding out can we reduce or eliminate those barriers.

And so that has been something that they've been combing through all different areas and they will continue with that work. uh addressing microaggressions is something that we have um decided to continue and shift the language a little bit for the um for the goal for this year and it's something that we're constantly working on. I had presented a couple of years ago that we were trying to have an outside organization come in and do some skill building with our staff. Um we've done some internal skill building about how to identify and address microaggressions headon. Um, and it's even um that that term is one that is a little bit outdated um that it's it's more that um a more common phrase is acts of exclusion or subtle acts of exclusion people say and so addressing how are we as adults in the building working to recognize that. Um but that's ongoing work. the co-curricular eligibility process. Um you'll hear Eric Hall speak about this when when he addresses the board with his goals. Uh and that is currently in progress right now. It started last spring by um surveying students, surveying parents, asking for people who wanted to be a part of the committee work and so that is moving forward as well. um the community outreach action steps. One of the um big pieces of work that we are trying to do is make more concrete connections between our curriculum and the community and then share that out with the community. One logistical barrier that became bigger than we thought, but we are addressing it this year is students not having um permission from families for us to share their photos. So, we made these amazing community newsletters and then couldn't send them out because not everybody had photo permission. So, we're working on that right now. We know that not all families are comfortable with that, but we're trying to get as many families as we possibly can find out who just didn't have permission and then we'll be able to if the numbers small enough, we would be able to identify students and take them out of that community newsletter.

But we had just um an amazing outpouring of support from the community to come in and bring resources here. Probably one of the most powerful ones was having veterans um from as recent as five years ago that they had served in um one of the branches of the armed forces to we had um one of the old um few World War II veterans who I think he was 95 years old who was here speaking to the students in the library and they had the opportunity to engage and ask questions.

So the more that we can um promote that work and expand upon that, that's what we are um excited to do. As well as our outreach coordinator, we're so fortunate to have that position who expands on ELLO's, extended learning opportunities, which are creditbearing experiences outside of the building. And that's something that you hear about in high schools across the state of Maine right now that all schools are looking at how do we get more kids involved in that? Um, and then support for learning and growth. This is our third year of a three-year partnership with the Jed Foundation. Um, as I've shared before, we received a grant to partner with the Jed Foundation. And they are a national organization that supports mental health um, awareness and resources. And so they helped us make a different strategic plan. We need a different name for it, but our mental health action steps. And it's really about incre increasing resources and awareness. Um things like our active minds club that um Phoebe is one of the leaders of and has spoken about just trying to really have um more resources readily available for students. And so we meet with the Jed team. We have our own representatives.

So that's ongoing work. Um and we have two faculty members who who lead that team here. We are constantly working on advisory. um we prioritize uh academic support and last year we expanded the number of callback days because feedback was that's where both students and staff really want us spending time in advisory. Um and we also expanded the opportunity for movement breaks um that we have open track and open gym available this year. The goal is to do it have it available almost every day um where it was much more limited in the past. And you will hear lots about cell phones um when we get there of what our current process or what our process was last year and um how we implemented that uh in order to um manage our students using their cell phones and also increase their engagement and and um reduce distractions in classes. So we'll come back to that and talk a lot about that. Um and so there's a couple of pieces of data. I I know that some data was presented last uh board meeting as well and there will be an upcoming meeting where the scorecard is shared with all of the data from um all of our our standardized testing. But I'm just sharing two pieces of data because our theory is vacuction is if we as a staff are working on all of those things, engaging instruction and purposeful assessment and um supporting the whole student that we will see gains in all of our data sources. This is one of our proudest sources of data um is that we work incredibly hard and Phoebe can tell you that at the beginning of the year when we hold assemblies with every grade I ask them what do you think the goal is and the kids shout back 100%. And I've said 100%. That is our goal to reach for 100% to be standing up on on those stairs at the Merrill and we've gotten close 98.8% uh we were down a little bit last year 96.6% 6% but we are really proud of those numbers. Uh but 100% is the goal and every student in this school is aware of that. Uh but this is another source of data that we were really proud to see last year. Uh in terms it's just one source of data but in terms of uh the AP scores you can see that 91.8% of our students who took an AP test scored a three or higher. um which we are incredibly proud of that and you can see that the number of testers up at the top is similar to the number of testers in 2021 when we were around 69% of our students. So we've made major gains from 2021 incrementally each year. Um, we have added, the superintendent asked this. Um, we have added some AP classes and there's also opportunity, more opportunities for students to take online AP classes that we don't offer.

So, that has increased some of the offerings. Um, but you see that the the numbers are similar. um and the success that kids are having on those. Our AP teachers are just doing an outstanding job um helping our students have a really meaningful learning experience and do well on the test. So, we're really proud of that data.

So, the other second so that's the strategic um plan and our action step side of the goal. The second goal that we had last year was based on our main three-year uh testing scores. And so the goal uh if you remember we no longer test nth graders. Uh we only test 10th graders and we test them both in the fall and um in the spring. We made it our mission last year to get as close to 100% of kids testing. Um feeling like that would help us feel really confident in the data. And um I was uh a little bit like a uh relentless with this and we had 148 out of 149 kids take the test last year which we were really really proud of that. And so our goal was um 65% of students to meet or exceed the achievement target um for math and 78% in reading. The challenge which you've heard me talk about the other administrators and Cindy Alexander talked about this last year is that in that shift from using the NWA test to going to main through year it's a little bit like uh it's not quite apples and oranges but it might be like red and green apples that um the sources of data and the way that they measure things are slightly different. And so when we look at main three-year testing, they have four categories of how either meet, exceed, below, well below. But when you look at NWA testing, which I have presented to you for the last 10 years and the other principles have as well, NWA has five categories that they do. So the images that I shared with you, what I was trying to um show you is that these are the categories that NWA breaks down our testing. And you can see that typically what I have shared with you in the past is the the yellow, the green, and the blue, which is any student who has has scored at the 41st percentile or higher. That's what NWA uses at the as the number. And you've heard some of the principles, I know Emily Grim has said this, that we felt like 41% was low. We felt like that for years to say that that's the mark that we're going for.

The state of Maine talks about 50th percentile. So what I did was you can see both. I calculated what 50% would be if we are using that as the number uh to say um how our students did in terms of our goals. And so you'll see down uh at the bottom for the math testing, oh, sorry, this is for reading um for the reading testing in the fall that we were at 77.4% of students who scored at the 50th um achievement level or higher. And then um in the spring we were at 78 um let me see I need my glasses. Uh 78.4%.

And so we exceeded our goal just by a tiny smidge, but it still exceed. Yeah. Cara, what is the 66th in the green? What's the number in the green?

That is like the median score of all of the students um that took the test. That that would be the median place where they would fall in the 66th percentile.

Um but so overall we had 78.4% at 50th uh achieve percentile achievement level or higher.

Um and then for math you can see that um in the fall we were at 74.7% the goal was at 65. Uh we dipped a little bit there uh and went down in the spring to 67.1% but um still exceeded that goal of 65%.

So we were very pleased with that and as I said before the hope is that the work that we have done on our instruction and in our classroom leads to improved outcomes in lots of different places graduation AP and um throughear testing.

Um so that is um the sum of the um the report of the goals for last year. Is there any questions about that before I move on to our current goals?

Okay, great. Um so for the 2025 goals 2026 you'll see what I did was again this is these are a very short synopsis um bulleted list of the action steps that we have prioritized for the coming year and you'll see that some of them are repeated common summitive assessments is something we are constantly constantly working on. Um, one thing you'll see in equity and inclusion is that I was super fortunate this summer I received a scholarship to go to a 5-day workshop in Washington DC that was about promoting civil discourse, which we know in the world right now is incredibly important. Um, I was the only person from Maine there and the only um, high school principal who was there. There were schools across the country that were about 250 people that were attending. Five days was a lot, but it was awesome. And so that is um where we've shifted the language of really focusing on microaggressions. What we want to do is talk about how do we promote respectful discourse and interactions in and out of the classroom. So it's a slightly different take on that. Um and the workshop is um is run by an organization called Sphere.

They're a nationwide organization that supports high schools um and middle schools in implementing uh concrete strategies to help do this in classroom.

How do you set up classroom discussions?

How do you start talking as a schoolwide culture about respectful discourse? So, we're excited about that. We haven't even touched on that yet, but that will be um something that we're working on. I highlighted the two because those are the two things that we are really going to focus on for the goals this year. Um, one is about professional development for executive functioning and the expectation is that every teacher will implement at least one strategy um and that every teacher is participating in a book study that is um actually started this week that is about executive functioning strategies through our um PLC's our professional learning communities. Um so that's the first part of the goal and the second part is professional development uh to support differentiated instruction and assessment. This is also something that we worked on last year. We did some faculty-wide workshops during faculty meetings and it's something that we had very positive feedback that those workshops were led by our own teachers and giving really concrete strategies about how do you differentiate your instruction for a wide range of learners in the same classroom and the feedback was that people wanted more of that and so that will be another piece that we're focused on and again the expectation is that teachers are implementing at least one strategy some who are already working on this as well. So, um I just instead of going through all of these uh um bullet points, I'm happy to share any information on uh any of them, but those are the two things that we're going to track um and that I will um share data on on what that has looked like this year, how we focused on that, and how we're measuring that in all of our classrooms.

And then um shifting to an attendance goal, you'll hear from all of the principles that we are continuing to work on attendance um as a district in all of our schools. Uh our goal at the high school is to reduce chronic absenteeism by 5% to be below 12%. Which you can see from the 2022 23 school year that would be a massive decline which we're hoping for um when we were at 21.5%.

uh we've stayed static for the last two years and are feeling that if we're implementing some new strategies and resources um that we are um hoping it's it's a lofty goal to get below 12% um and we're going to work hard to get there. And so if you see on the right hand side um we are going to pump information out to families and to students. Why is it important to be here? Um how can we support your attendance? What are ways that the more connected a student is to school and research has shown over and over again um that they're more likely to attend and their overall attendance and um performance is improved. Um we have attendance alerts that will continue to go out to parents. Um we are very fortunate that we're a small enough high school that we track every student every period of the day. and a parent gets a phone call anytime that a student is not sitting in class um or text message like I got this morning when I forgot to call about a doctor's appointment.

That's right, Michelle. Um we're so happy to be using Reach My Teach. This is something I have um children in Portland schools, so I've been on the parent side of it. Um and we are really excited to use this. It's just much more user friendly. You'll see like as Michelle said, it's quick text messages.

parents can text back, which we know is a much faster way to reach parents. Um, and so that is a part of the strategies.

Um, we're working on professional development for administrators. All of the assistant principles went to an attendance workshop already. Uh, and we'll be implementing some of the strategies um, from that workshop. And then just a constant reminder of our procedures and expectations which have gotten tighter um as I've shared with the board about um really reviewing absences that are um not what we would deem excusable and seeing if they're excusable and also um we've reduced the period absences um by requiring notification for when a student is being dismissed. Uh and so feeling like all of these things plus our new action steps uh our hope is to get to below 12% because we know the more that kids are in school um the more that we're able to support them. So do you have off the top of your head, sorry I didn't ask this ahead of time um just a sort of baseline precoid number like were we below 12 ever or is 16 and more?

Uh that's a great question. I don't think we've ever been below 12. Um but we were not at 20. That was like right postco that was the highest that we've been. I'd have to look back and see what the um rates are that we could definitely get that number. Just curious and that's it. Um questions about our goals.

I the only question I had Thank you.

This is as always very um expansive. So thank you for all of this info. I was curious how long our partnership with the Jud Foundation lasts.

So the partnership is three years. Um but after that um part of their um support for us is that you are forever considered a Jed school and we are the first Jed school in Maine. So we were really proud u to to uh be a part of their organization. And what that means for the end of our third year, we started by having a student in a staff survey uh in year one and we will end this year. That's a big part of their support is that they do all of the data management uh for they create the survey, we administer the survey, they code all of the data and give it back to us to see our students more aware of the mental health resources that we have.

have we put action steps in place that have helped to promote um mental health and mental wellness and so we'll see that through the survey that will be at the end of this year.

I'm I'd be curious to see sort of the the I don't know if they separate it by grade but it'd be interesting to see the seniors data because they were here before Jed. They're probably the only class that was here before Jed and at the end of the three years. So it'll be interesting to see the data. It definitely and I think some of the Jed um support has been really helpful and what we have found is that some of the Jed support um by listening to other schools present it was for schools that had no mental health resources in place.

We are so fortunate here that we had some of the things in place already, but our hope is that we've expanded um especially uh in the minds of students that they are more aware of of um where they can access resources. Thank you, Laura.

Thank you so much, Jen. Um I just was wondering if you had any additional reflection on the Sorry, this is going back to the goals from last year, but on the math through your data and that dip and if that's something that typically happens or if that's sort of an anomaly and if that's you know you have reflections on or any discussions on that.

Um it's I think one of the things that we're looking at is there are some challenges with the test. I think you'll hear that um about you know how um students perform in the fall versus the spring. what the actual bank of questions is. My understanding is that it's I need to like dig into this more, but my understanding is that the bank of questions in the fall is different than the bank of questions in the spring and how it's adjusting for levels. Um, but I think that it it it depends on so many different factors, but that is typically a bigger jump than we would see from the fall coming in um to the spring. But again it adjusts based on um the students answer and so what they have answered and then the next question is either adjusting higher or adjusting lower and so so many different factors can go into it. We also give this test at a time of year um you know they're a little bit we're giving NWBA testing right now it's a little bit fresher in the year um and so sometimes that can even though they've had more math content by the spring it certainly can be sometimes Phoe's nodding her head sometimes it can be the factors of everything else that's happening at that time too so I can't say exactly why we've had that dip uh we're happy that it's still at the goal that we had set But it's certainly something for us to look into and we can break into the specific skills. This data is broken down into for each student it would show Jen Gulo and then how I've done on four discrete skills in math. And so we can look at patterns across kids too where they're scoring higher. One um example of that is it measures statistics and probability which almost always comes at the very tail end of the curriculum and so we spend less time on that and so that's a conversation for us to have is that something that we need to adjust in our pacing and time.

Thank you.

Thanks for this, Jim. Um, a question about the common common summitive assessments for any course taught by multiple teachers. Can you share a little bit more about what that has looked like before and what you're hoping that will look like with this goal?

Sure. I think that so this has been something that we've been working on for years. And so if we have three algebra 1 teachers in the past um there was at in some courses some departments the teachers might have been very much aligned and they were doing almost lock step of the same units at the same time and then giving the same assessment.

That wasn't necessarily the case everywhere. could be, for example, we inherit a teacher from another school who's come in who's taught this course for a long time. They have their assessment set. Um, and so, uh, it could be that Jen Gulko and Charlie Melon are teaching the same class and we're close aligned, but at the end we're giving a different assessment. And so, we have really pulled that apart to say my style can be very different than Mr. Melon style. You can imagine it's a little different than Mr. Melon style. Um, and so there's there's value in that, but in the end, we should be using the same tool to measure those skills. And so that we've spent a ton of time in our PLC's, in our departments, in our summer work to give the exact same assessment.

It might be um that my assessment if my students went further, it could be that I have some additional questions on there, but that the bulk and the heart of what we're measuring is the same if we're teaching the same course. And so that's the goal that we're constantly working on. Um particularly it could be for example, we used to have um in a particular science class, we used to have only one teacher. So that teacher never had to align with another teacher.

Now we have two teachers teaching that and then they have to come together with their practices and compromise and and collaborate on what that assessment looks like and our teachers have done an absolutely outstanding job of working on that.

Um Google Classroom for students have they not had access to Google Classroom or like what what's been used in the past?

Yeah, that's a great question. So, I I should have made that a little bit more specific. So, um Mr. Melon and I created a um Google Classroom for staff and it's one location where a staff can find anything, handbooks, agendas, and so we made a general one for all students.

That's where they can find the calendar and the bell schedules, things that impact the whole school are in Google Classroom because the students have said that that's a a valuable tool for them.

they're using it for each of their individual classes. Um, and so we have out of our 580 kids, we have 300 I think we're at like around 350 who have joined that Google classroom. So now we can put things in there to say this is the advisory calendar for the month. This is um you don't have school on Friday and then everybody gets that message at the same time. So it's just again one of those executive functioning things. We heard from kids it would be helpful and so we created that this year.

It's a it's a maybe a potential alternative to sending out emails that they don't open. Yes. Okay. Yes. What do you mean, Michelle? They open all their emails.

Every email they open, right? Every email. Yes.

Except when they hit delete all. I've watched that. That is just like painful to my heart. Colin, um, thanks so much for this, Jen. I'm um curious about the um it's awesome what you got to go to the promoting civil discourse that sounds like such a wonderful opportunity and the goal of um shifting attention to promoting respectful discourse interaction sounds wonderful. I guess I have two questions on that. is um I guess and without getting too much into the weeds is I guess one is like how is that goal going to be activated in the classroom setting and are there particular um classes I guess sort of as a as an English teacher myself I sort of think about how that would um uh how respectful discourse and interaction would would work in the context of um you know analyzing a text or discussing um something in history class. And I guess my other question is is how either are um teachers being supported in any of that work through PD or is there are there any plans to support them in that work?

That's a great question. So um some of the strategies that uh we learned about and and observed in the summer workshop that I participated in. Um we're so fortunate that some of our teachers are already using that. So, an example would be um a really specific lesson to set up norms for your classroom of what's an acceptable way to engage in um a debate or a discussion on a particular topic.

It could be in any uh content area. So, some of our teachers are already doing that. For some, that might be more uh new where they're engaging in different kinds of conversations that they have or a topic that wasn't controversial.

um maybe if you're talking about students view versus adults view on cell phones and how do we do that in a respectful way that might be new for some teachers. And so it's giving really specific strategies of how you set that lesson up, how you monitor that and facilitate that as the adult um when and how you step into a conversation when you feel like um it's not um respectful discourse and how do you cut that off?

And so some of our teachers, like I said, have been engaging in that. Some will need this real specific PD about that. The organization that I worked with this summer actually provides it's I don't totally know where all their money comes from, but they provide free professional development. And so it's not something right at this moment that we have prioritized. Um, and because they're a nationwide group, it would be something that we would have to set with them way far in advance. But I spoke to them specifically this summer when I was in DC about that. Would you come to Maine? And they were like, "Yeah, we'd come to Maine." And so, um, that, you know, a possibility that I spoke to them about is I have my principal group that I value so much and in the, um, you might now call it Sebago, Greater Sebago for our principles, um, because Cumberland isn't, um, capturing everyone, but we've talked about it could potentially be representatives from all of our schools.

um participating in some sort of professional development. So hopefully that that's in the works.

I came back with a suitcase of books, too. Wow. It was wonderful. Yeah.

I'm so interested why you were the only high school person there. Like from Maine. From Maine, high school principal. It was teachers. Oh, it was really interesting. They were they were asking me the same thing like what are you doing here? Um but uh administrators could go. there were a handful um of assistant principles or um curriculum directors that were from all over the country, but I'm not sure why it wasn't um there were very few from New England at all. Um so it was predominantly um in the South or in the Midwest. Wonderful.

Other questions for Jen? We'll give her a quick break and a cookie. and a cookie. Thank you so much.

Thank you. Appreciate it.

All right. So, uh our next uh presentation is Peter Wagner for community programs.

Are you using the No. Okay.

Nope. No. I'll just be going off of my pad here. You are taller, so you can move it.

All right.

Great. Um, hi everyone. Um, so I'll take a look back at um at last year's goals and give you a couple of updates on those. Um the first was um a relatively ambitious project at um really diving into adult enrichment programming based on the premise that we had really taken a nose dive and not recovering uh post pandemic. And um so the um the update on that goal is that we started down that road but abandoned it ultimately. Um finding generally that our adult enrichment program anecdotally was maybe never quite as robust as we thought it was or I thought it was and that our fall-off maybe had not been all that dramatic compared to other adult ed offices um in our Cumberland County hub.

Um so we um we did have some engaging conversations about that with some partners um in the hub. Um we uh we did revive some programs that we had done in the past and brought back for our August 2025 catalog and some other new programs. um one of our uh one of our our newest staff member actually on the team, Kathy Deg Grand Prix, um has taken uh it it upon herself to um to really be plugging in with the community and find community partners who can who can uh add to our enrichment programming. So, we have a lot of those new programs in the book this time around. So, we've we've made a nice rebound there, I think. And then um as a part of our annual um reporting uh took a look back at at the number of people that we had involved in our adult education programs all all the way across the board. So that's English learners, it's high set learners, but then it's also adult enrichment and um so I've updated that in the document that you have there. But in in 2020, fiscal year 2020, which I guess includes the the first couple of months of the pandemic, our total number was 780.

In fiscal year 21, the first full year of the pandemic, that number dropped to 97.

Um so that was that was truly the the low point. But the numbers since then 20 20 uh 22 through 25 um 435 586 595 and then this past year 794.

So um so thi this year was the first year that we rebounded actually beyond the the number of people um that were in the program prior to the pandemic. And that number does not include the significant bump that we received uh I guess probably fiscal year 22 and 23 when uh the asylum seekers were in the hotels here in town and we had we were counting so many of those folks in our English learning programs. So, um, so generally speaking, I'm I'm quite pleased, I think, with where what we learned where our adult ed program is, uh, in in regard to enrichment right now, and it's just really exciting to see that number, um, finally be above where we were in 2020. So, I feel like we're back on solid footing, even if last year's goal was not uh, uh, explicitly completed as as written.

Um, any any questions or anything we'd like to talk about with that one before I move on to the next one?

I'll just say congratulations. That's incredible.

Yeah, thanks. No, that feels that feels really good to to see those numbers.

Um, the second goal um last year was uh to launch at least one new program aimed at marginalized and/or underserved populations. And um we were able to get a unified soccer program for our wreck uh wreck aged participants off the ground last year.

Um we had 18 um participants in that particular part of our program. Um and we have similar numbers so far in 2025.

So we launched it last year. We've had a reboot for this year. Things are going well. And um actually as I was looking through this documentation and and thinking about an update for um for you all um I got in touch with with Bill Ridge who uh we had been in some conversations with last year about um uh about a unified basketball team at the middle school level which they were able to launch and get that going and it was it was wonderful and a big success. But something he had said last year um sorry pardon me um made me want to dig a little bit deeper. And so uh Bill and I met just last week and we're looking at um community programs is looking at supporting a yearround unified club at Freeport Middle School which would be athletics and other activities one day a week from October right on through June.

So, um, so that will be that will be, um, specifically a middle school club project, um, but a nice collaboration.

We'll be able to, um, to jump in there and support them and and help with planning and, um, and management and staffing. So, excited to to be able to, um, to have that additional element to to our programming.

Um the goals for this year um if there's a theme for this year I think it is reconnecting and uh and plugging in. Um certainly looking back at my own interactions and places I was spending my time and collaboration that I was doing. Um I I I attribute it to the 2020 2021 year, but there's probably more to it than that even. Um uh things have fallen off a little bit. And so, uh, so the first goal that I that I have that I really want to get back to, and I think it's going to, um, be great for our office and hopefully also good for the for the students and staff at each of the schools, is to reestablish regular meetings with building administrators to create um, regular opportunities to collect their feedback and ideas that are specific to each school's population. Um so as you can imagine the sorts of things that we do whether it's recreation or enrichment um for the uh for the kids um it's very different from school to school um and it's different uh the the K through2 needs in Poundell are different than the K through2 needs in Freeport or Durham. Um so getting really granular with um with the principles about that and hearing from them about what they're seeing on the ground, what sorts of things maybe we're missing, things that we could do um that would uh that would really enhance um life for the for the families and and uh for the communities in those schools.

We'd like to do that. So um so I'm going to get back into those meetings. I have um the first round of those scheduled for next week with all six principles.

So, I'm really looking forward to to getting that going again and and and doing better for each of the schools.

All right. And um very much uh with the same theme, um I think there's a lot for us to learn from uh from more direct and targeted collaboration with our partners in uh recreation departments um in the area and also at Aldic offices. So we have opportunities each year uh to get together at at conferences and um you know regularly monthly scheduled meetings where there are a lot of adult ed directors or rec directors on the on the phone or on Zoom. Um, and there's always something to be learned there, but I want to drill down a little bit further and schedule an hour or two or like a, you know, a half day um, to spend with with colleagues who do the same work that we do to find out um, uh, the places where they're successful, the places they struggle, the things we have in common, look for best practices, and just look for some good new ideas that will better serve our community.

So, I'm really looking forward to both of these goals for the coming year and just really getting plugged back in with the people who uh can help us be better.

Questions for Peter?

I don't have a question, but I just wanted to say thank you for this, Peter.

I appreciate it. I think that it sounds great this learning that you're going to seek to do. And also um wanted to say what a joy it is to drive by the laugh and learn when I go to pick my son up from MLS every day and now that that's there and all the hard work that you and your team put into that just it's very lovely and the playground looks beautiful and thank you so much.

Thank you. Thanks so much. Yeah, that's that has been as you all know you've been hearing me talk about that Laugh and Learn Center for more than three years now. Um, and this was kind of the crowning piece of that project, finally getting a playground of our own. Um, if you haven't seen it yet, it's a natural playground. Um, and uh, right there at the entrance to Mass Landing School, so please swing by and take a look. Uh, it's it's really just everything we hoped it could be. Thank you.

Okay. Thank you, Peter.

Okay. Thank you. And the Yankees are losing, just so you know. Even better.

[Laughter] Okay.

So, uh administrator. Okay. So, that's it for what we have for administrator reports. We don't have board comments and committee reports uh for today. We don't have a policy review. Um so, we will move on to unfinished business. And uh the first of those uh is the cell phone usage. Um I think you're going to kick us off.

Sure. So we have with the understanding that the board's purpose tonight is to be in a listening mode. Um I know our student rep Phoebe has collected student data and the principles of Freeport High School, um the assistant principal of Freeport Middle School and principal of Durham Community School are all here. they have surveyed their staff. Um the results of those surve they're going to discuss the results of those surveys. Uh although the raw results of them had some in the comments information that was probably just best kept summarized by the principles rather than distributed wholesale. Um sometimes people would would mention things that work for kind of in school consumption only. So, Phoebe, I wonder if I could put you on the spot and we could hear first about the student perspective.

Uh, for sure. So, I have some information that a couple of my peers and I put together. So, I'd love to pop it up on the projector if that's possible. Um, this library.

Um, so actually in the spring of last year, the student leadership team um began to try to get some information um from students and we sent out a survey and we actually got 205 responses, which might not seem like a lot, but Miss Goko can attest to this. for a survey that was sent out in emails only. That's a pretty good number. Uh we got all four grades. We got a lot of perspectives.

So, um we would love to try to do more of that. It was really towards the end of the year last year, like it was finals week, and so this is how passionate kids were to take their time um during finals week to fill this out. But we could definitely get many many more responses um if the board and the community wants that. But for a snapshot um we talked about the current policy that's in place um and whether or not that's working, not working. And we see a lot of students. Any chance you can make it bigger? Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. We have old eyes, baby.

Sorry. Okay. How's that? Oh, wait. That's too big. Okay. Yeah. What's the scale?

So, five is Hold on. Let me find the question again. Okay. This was the first question. So, in your classes, how much is the cell phone tree, which is like kind of the shoe rack, which is kind of our current policy? How much is that enforced? So five is teachers always have our make us always put our phones up and check each student's phone is up and one is not that and so then this is oh crap um okay you're good summary okay this is the distribution of that so a lot of people are landing here at like they're I like I see this as they're asking us. They're reminding us to put it up, but they're not necessarily like checking. Okay, this student's phone is up. This student's phone is up. Um, question two is, how often are you asked to keep your phone like out of view? So, this is more like off and away type of thing, which is not our building's current policy. So this would be something that's like a little bit away from what most are doing, but we see that a lot of students are kind of experiencing that. So that's more a matter of like it's not just that this current policy of the phone trees isn't working, it's also that it's not exactly being enforced. um which I think kind of shows that it is really difficult to enforce.

Um so the rest of the questions are scaled basically like that. So five is like I agree, one is like I strongly disagree. So we asked about um the consequences which I think our current policy is that if a teacher sees a phone out they have the discretion to send it to the office to be picked up at the end of the day. And I think one detention is okay. A detention is given after multiple infractions.

And this was when we asked how much you see kids on their phone in class. And so five is let me check that.

Let's check.

Oh my gosh, that's so helpful. You're so nice. Thank you. Um, okay. Wait. So, I'm going to go back. Never mind. Um, okay.

How much do you see your kids on their phones during class? Five is multiple kids are on their phone during the class period. One is no one is able to and no one is using their phone during class. So, this is like Yeah, pretty solid. 99 kids said in that two range. And then here we have communal places, hallways, bathrooms, pretty spread out.

Five here is going to be the I've seen multiple people at a time in communal spaces and one is I never see anyone and these communal spaces are allowed.

Yes, this is during passing periods. I think this question it's not as clear but I believe most kids were answering this question as during class. So kids students leaving class and being in the hallway or being in the bathroom. Phones currently are allowed in the hallway and bathroom during passing periods. So that's something we can get back to you on. Um cafeteria. Yes, that's allowed during lunchtime. Great.

Yes. Um, staff enforcement five here is they enforce it quite a bit and one is they don't. So, we're seeing like pretty good amount there. And then this is fairness of the current policy which is the again the phone tree one. Um, five is they're a good balance. the rules are fair and one is they're absolutely not.

This is when kids start getting passionate.

Um, all right. And then we've got some pie charts. Rules should get less there should be less regulation.

Um, more regulation. That orange again that is orange is they should be less strict.

Blue is they should be more strict and red is they're fair as they are. Um, and then this is where we we talked about the pouches specifically. So, this is Can you scroll up just a little so we can see the question? Yeah. So, it's Yonder pouches.

Those are again the locked ones. This is the brand that we just had in the survey, which I did not make this, by the way. I don't want to take credit for it. Um, a peer of mine on the student leadership team made it.

I can't see the questions now. Oh, wait. Can I go in here? Nope.

What? Oh. Um, okay. So, when we asked about the yonder pouches, so one is absolutely not.

Yeah, one is absolutely not. Five is it's good idea. So, right there. Yeah.

So, that's a hard no on the pouches from the student.

Correct. But then we got a we asked a question about what about using yonder pouches as kind of a form of punishment if students were not following the policy like our current policy is like if you have multiple infractions then you get the yonder bag just one student. Um and this is the breakdown of that. And the blue is that that seems like a good idea. The red is that everyone should get the pouches. And the yellow is Oh, wait. I'm confused.

Blue and orange are both fair choices, I guess. So, yeah. Sorry about that. Um, and then Hazel made kind of a summary. So, I can and I can send this to everyone. Um, here's some like quotes pulled out. We also had like open-ended questions about the current policy, potential other policies. Um, so a lot of students said they're not consistently enforced. Um, and then in terms of the yonder pouches specifically, people worry about uh safety. People worry about fairness. Um, they want to be trusted by teachers.

This is super small. I'm sorry. Um, so yeah, I can send this out or if people want to look, I can print it out.

But that were that was our findings. And then the general summary is many feel that the current enforcement is too inconsistent teacher by teacher. Some are too strict. Some and a lot of people want more fair and clear enforcement.

And the resistance to the poaches is pretty widespread. But um there is support for that kind of middle ground with the pouches.

And yeah, so thanks to Hazel who could not make it for making this and she worked on form. Um, but if anyone has questions or wants to look at this more clearly, I can answer those. Although I'm not 1,000% have this memorized. Any questions, thoughts?

Yeah, right. I know this. And then now we go. Um, couple of questions. First of all, thank you to you and the leadership team for uh for putting this together. I think you know more than a third of the student body is a pretty good turnout for a survey, right? Anything over 25% is any survey is is good returns, right?

So that's that's great. Um, as as Cynthia used to say, it does create some wonderings for me. I wonder if there was a a difference in the perspective from freshman to seniors, right? Freshmen who came out of a uh no cell phones in middle school, so they weren't as used to having them as opposed to seniors who've had four years of, you know, it's gotten tighter over those four years, but basically four years of freedom with their phones. Um so that for me that's a wondering. Also curious um if when you guys had your leadership summit with other leadership teams if you um had any opportunity to talk to potentially schools that have instituted similar policies with sort of a a a way for the day policy um and what what the student assessment was.

Yeah. Yeah. So, the schools we were with um that day were Portland High School, which does, I believe, have a bell-to-bell policy, and Bangor High School. Um, and I don't remember specifically having that conversation with them, but that's a network of schools that we're in that we can utilize if um the board or administrators want to have students asking students from other schools. I know we've brought in um testimony from from administrators and maybe some teachers at other districts who have implemented this, but I do think student input from those same schools would be beneficial. And I think that's something we can um try to find. And to your question about like grade differentiation, that's not data that we took in the survey because we really wanted to emphasize the anonymity of it.

Um, which is something that we um try really hard to emphasize on student leadership. Um but gathering more information, we can surely get um more like more specific information about the grades and more specific experiences for sure. Yeah, I think you know we've seen a lot of we've seen a lot of articles um we've seen a lot of studies um you know and and they seem to be very positive and the take is that students are on board with it too but anecdotally when I have been out at things with kids in different districts I one of the first questions I always ask them is what's the cell phone policy at your school how is it going how did you you know how was it implemented was it good was it bad um you know the general consensus is probably in line with what you put up there. Um, I would be interested in hearing from I mean Portland is very new, right? So, they're going through the the initial pains of of transition.

Um, it would be really interesting to hear about a school that had, you know, that's done it for a year or two, right?

and to actually talk to the students that may have been there before and through the transition and like have they seen sort of a settling of I mean any change is difficult and it's a challenge and I fully uh understand that and it's not a reason not to make change just because it's going to be hard. Um but I'd be interested to hear kind of down the road a bit if um if we can get any student um insights into that. I I would find that helpful. I don't know if others would, but so yeah. So the listening schools network, which I'm not exactly sure how many schools are in there, but it's a good amount. And um I can reach out to our facilitator there and ask her to connect me with um reps from other teams and see if they would be willing to share some thoughts from that. And I can email it to you guys or send it along with Moon if that works. Other questions on the student survey piece before we move on to Yeah.

Yeah. Phoebe, thank you so much and and Hazel uh Hazel. Yes. Um for doing this is so so awesome. Thank you so much for doing this. Um I'm just curious what uh like that word punishment and like punishing keeps popping up in this. What did you all intend that to mean or what do you think that means when the word punishment is being used?

Um I think I don't know if that was the best word to use. I think her intention when our intention when thinking of that maybe more of like a consequence because it is directly related to the infraction, right? like you're misusing your phone and then you're getting that like direct consequence of not having it during the day. Um, but I think there's a pretty a lot of students feel like, oh, it's just these few students who can't manage their phones. Because it's true, a lot of students are able to manage it during the school day. A lot of students are not. Um, and I think some students feel like, well, I've never been sent to the office for being on my phone in class. I've never broken the current policy or been caught breaking the current policy, so why does the whole district need pouches or whatever? So, I think that was kind of the idea with that word, but I don't think it's not it's not exactly punishment. maybe more like a I think when they think of punishment for like um starting a policy, they're just maybe a little angry.

No. And I and I think that's a that's a perfect that's a perfectly uh reasonable or um understandable reaction. I just I think it just sort of jumped out at me because I think it um I guess maybe it probably will come up later in our conversation, but I think that um I don't think uh I don't think ever in the in the board's conversation about this there's been any um uh sense that like that this is meant as a p this is meant as a punishment or even meant as or even meant as a consequence. Um, and so I think that that's just an interesting I, you know, to use your word, like wondering, right? Like the sort of the data point of like, um, it just seems to reveal that there's just a, um, a kind of a divide in kind of how people even just conceptualize what we're even talking about. And that's not a pro, that's not bad, that's just interesting.

Yeah, for sure. And I think it kind of comes down to a I think a lot of students are misinformed about what the board does or a lot of times the reasonings for policies at a district level or a school level. So whatever does come out come from these conversations we're having about uh possible like district-wide policy or what will become one. um communication to high school students about the why and the data to back it up which we did have that um from Miss Gulman and Mr. Melon last year when the um phone hotel policy was started we had students were presented with that information but um I don't know if they forgot that part or if it wasn't clear enough but I do think that um the why and the information is important when it comes to um the roll out of whatever comes from these discussions.

Yeah, that's super helpful. I guess my other question is just um uh and I'm not sure whether you sort of we saw a little bit of this, but I'm curious whether there anything kind of between the lines or anything in the in the comments about why teachers don't enforce it. Um in terms of the student perspective on that, I'm not asking for like, you know, the actual um the actual reason, but like but what is it? What is the perspective on why the teachers are not consistently enforcing it or why um some teachers I think to use your language some teachers are very strict about it and some teachers don't care. I think that was the language that that was used. Do you have any sense of that?

I think some students feel like it's a matter of like the like how much of an issue it is but they're not seeing all of the the struggles with it. Um, and I think some students do realize that it's a whole another layer of classroom management that teachers don't have like the training on or the like specific knowledge about cuz it's totally foreign to um a lot of classrooms like having to enforce this policy and spend the first, you know, five minutes of class, everyone put your phone up in the tree or whatever. And so I think a lot of students do recognize that, but I think others also wonder about like our teachers having a hard time enforcing it because they don't feel like it's a problem. And um yeah, still wondering if it even is, which I think is another reason of like more information, more education about, you know, coming cuz I think at this point it's more fact than opinion that the phones are not amazing.

Yeah. I think the idea of sort of pairing separating that it's you know oh I can manage myself and you know and more you shouldn't have to right you should be free to be in the classrooms learning and and you know this is a this is a whether you can manage I'm sure you can most people can but is it best practice is it you know and are we giving you the best chance to fully immerse in the in the education if it's in your hand And um and you know those a lot of those answers feel kind of punitive, right?

Like I feel like they're they're punishing us. They're making it stricter like um so I think if you know if we move forward with something um you know bell to bell whatever we want to call it um I think sort of changing that language is going to be key. So who do we have next?

Thanks, Phoebe.

Uh, I think I would like to ask Principal Gulo to go next. And assistant principal Melon.

Okay, thank you everybody. Thank you.

It's nice to see you all. Uh, I'm going to start uh and then Jen's gonna jump in. Um, so I'm just going to talk a little bit about a little uh history, I guess, and just kind of I was here last spring talking to you guys about uh our cell phone policy, how it was going, some of the challenges we we were having. Um, which you know kind of were summarized pretty seamlessly in uh in Phoe's presentation, too. Um, and and I just wanted to remind you like about what our policy currently is uh and why it is that way and some of the other other things we've been talking about and then Jen will talk more about some specific feedback we've received uh from teachers. Um so this year we started our uh year with the same policy we had last year uh which means that students are not allowed to have phones in any academic setting uh and that includes advisories study halls here in the library uh any academic uh setting and the expectation is that when they go into a classroom they're going to be putting their phones into you know what Phoebe referred to as the phone three.

Um, they are allowed to have their phones in between classes. They're allowed to have their phones at lunch.

Uh, and that's pretty much it. Um, and we, our leadership team struggled over the summer trying to figure out what we should do, if we should continue this policy. Uh, you know, as I said last spring, it was definitely better last year. It by no means perfect, though.

Uh, and it kind of got worse as the year went on. I think it we started strong.

Uh but you know as as um Phoebe said and like or as her data kind of indicated um you know it it becomes a struggle for our educators uh to to kind of uh fight this battle every day uh when they're when you know getting kids to put their phone in the phone tree uh and and and they they make choices based on the time they have and what they what they want to do with the time they have when they're in front of the the kids and so sometimes that falls to the wayside. Uh and so, you know, as the year went on, it kind of fell apart. Um not totally, not totally at all. And it was definitely better than it was the year before. Uh and so that's kind of what we talked about last spring here with the board. Uh this year, you know, it's it's it's started strong. It's started it's starting strong, I should say. Um there's definitely issues though already for sure. even today, yesterday, every day, uh, something comes up with with phones. Uh, we have kids who are, you know, who are getting now detentions because there's been multiple times. We have kids who who are now forced to leave their phone in the office for the day for a period of time because it's gone beyond the detentions. So, we've had the detentions that then it continues to happen. We've had parent meetings, which is the next step after the detentions. Uh and then it's leave your phone in the office for the day uh for those kids. Uh and we have a few kids who are already on that plan. Um and usually those kids are on that plan for like a month or a couple weeks. um the so so you know it's it's it's it's an ongoing thing that's that's definitely um you know consuming a lot of a lot of our energy which is fine and we're we're working on it but it's it's uh and and I would say though that you know it's the beginning of the year and things are overall pretty good with the phones. I also want to point out the other thing we talked about last year was and came up tonight already too is the importance of you know education in in you know combination with whatever we're doing um and you know we're still thinking about that talking about that last year with Annie Annie's group and the RC RC5 technology group we tried to get project reboot here uh and we're hoping to maybe do that again too uh I was with assistant principles from other schools who are also interested. Um, and and basically that's that group that can come in. It's a it's a guy who comes in and does an assembly and has some follow-up materials about not not saying don't be on your phone. It's much more of a here's what it's doing. It's raising awareness. It's about, you know, empowering kids, get just giving them knowledge to to help them make good decisions around their phones. And so we're we're trying to get him in and if we can get other schools in the area to also have these assemblies, it's much cheaper. He comes from California. So So we're uh so we're we're we're also continuing to discuss like how we can, you know, have this education piece in addition to the the policies and the rules and the procedures and things like that. Um, so that's a kind of overview of of kind of where we've been, where we're at today, and kind of a little bit where we want to go. And now Jen's going to tell a little bit more about the uh staff perspective.

Thanks, Charlie. Um, and I I I think that before I share um we just have one um piece of data that we're going to share from our staff. Uh I think that a big challenge is going to be that it has been a priority at the high school for us to elevate student voices and have them have a seat at the table and be a part of decision-m and I think something that is going to I can foresee as a challenge because it's already been a challenge is it feels like we're standing on opposite shores. Um and it so one of the things that um Mr. Melon and I did was we also coded all the student data from the survey. And one of the things that um a wonderful AI helped us do was it will determine the tone of um it not doesn't just summarize but it also tells you the tone. You can imagine the tone. It was like ranges from emotional and angry to frustrated. But one of the things that came out is it said um that students are feeling unheard or dismissed by the administration which I think we never want that to be the case. We're working really hard to improve communication and this is one of those places where um it's certainly top of our of mind of you're going to see how different the staff feedback is from the student survey. And I think it's just something um that we're trying to figure out how do we work together when we really are coming from very different perspectives.

I have seen students who can absolutely manage their phone. It's in their bag.

It never comes out in class to another student who's in class receives a notification which most of us flip our phones over or look at our watch. I'm guilty of that. Um and whatever they received I might be observing the class and I'm in the back. whatever message they received just like dismantled that lesson and that child has checked out.

Um, and the fewer times that we're seeing phones in class, the fewer times that we're seeing that happen. Um, a unique perspective I have is I am the parent of two Portland public schools children who both have yonder bags. One is a middle schooler who has said very very little of it about it. uh one is a high schooler who has a lot to say who got to speak to Michelle this weekend and share her perspective. And so I've also had the chance to talk to Portland um uh administrators and teachers about how different that perspective is. Um and so I do think it's a great idea.

Morse High School is in their second year and they are somebody we've communicated with about going to visit and so that might be a place where we see because we're watching Portland in their growing pains and I hear about that um from your principal and also uh at home at the dinner table and so um I think it's just important to bring that up that we have worked really hard to collaborate with students um and and the viewpoints right now I think um are uh they feel divided right now. Um we did not craft a survey for the um staff that was meant to come to the board. This was a survey that we gave in the spring. Um as I shared with my goals that we were getting feedback from our staff about our action steps and what the leadership team uh wanted to do. And so we certainly can solicit way more specific u feedback. I think anecdotally uh a lot of what Charlie said um a lot of what Phoebe said resonates too. Some of the feedback is the same is that there is this um feeling of some teachers of exhaustion of fighting this fight of they have planned this outstanding lesson and they don't want to start the first five minutes of arguing with students about did you did you not really not bring your phone? You don't have a phone. Why is your phone not here? Where's your phone? that that is definitely um something that some teachers have said they got to march and they had done it every day every class um and that started to they started to just dive right into their lesson and hope that phones were away. Um but so um one piece of feedback um that will um show a little bit. We had uh we had 37 teachers complete this and um we going to do this. So remind me how many that's out of. Uh we had 37 teachers is uh that is out of um 52 who could have taken this and um so it's 81% of our respondents for this one if funding was not an issue. Would you support FHS exploring the use of yonder bags? 78.4% said yes. Um, and if you combine the yes with like I'd like to hear more from other schools, we need more info on this. Sure. I don't know who wrote that one. Um, that 81% of our respondents uh were in favor of exploring this. 8% want more information and 11% said that they don't want it. Um and so but the total number of uh 71% of our teachers who answered this survey um the rest of our survey was really asking specifically about advisory. Advisory is the place where we struggle the most. Um, and some students have said that's not instructional time, but as I've shared, we have shifted our advisory to about 85% of the time is dedicated to callbacks, which is instructional support, reteing, working on um specific tasks for a lesson. So, it's very much instructionally focused. And that is the most difficult time to manage phones uh according to the teachers uh and trying to figure out how um we move forward with that. we came to the decision of um staying status quo that there are not supposed to be any phones in advisory um that we use the phone trees for those as well. Um and so uh we also teachers you can see this had a lot to say like that uh and so um as superintendent gray said some of it is identifying with names and things like that. So um encoding the data these are just uh some of the key things that came up. They also feel uh teachers also feel that inconsistent enforcement of our current policy is a major issue. They feel overburdened by having to constantly remind students to put their phones away. Um the current system with the classroom holders is seen as better than previous efforts but still very difficult to manage. Students often bypass the rules by quote forgetting their phone, hiding their phone, or using them in hallways or bathrooms. Um, uh, staff are concerned about funding and logistics of yonder bags. They still have a lot of questions about that. Um some staff believe that teaching responsible phone use is more important than removing the phones completely but the majority felt um that removing the phones would be a major factor in reducing uh the distraction.

um they feel that the support for yonder bags would reduce uh um excuse me that they're strongly in favor um as I said 81% of our respondents they feel that it would reduce distractions increase instructional time and eliminate power struggles um they believe that um that it would remove the burden of phone management from individual teachers and lead to more consistent enforcement if we were using the uh yonderback bags. Um some of their comments had um stated that um staff from Morris High School had shared uh that they had had positive results um from using the yonder bag. Um they had questions about fundraising.

Um and um some did say that they were open to continuing our current system. Um but that we really need to figure out how um to manage more consistent enforcement.

Um and some express the need for more data or research before fully committing to a change. Um such as the the yonder bags. Um, but the last uh bullet was there's a strong desire to prioritize teaching and student connection over the phone usage um and phone discipline on a daily basis and feeling like the majority felt like the yonder bag would be a tool that would remove that if it was schoolwide.

So, those are some of the uh pieces.

again. Um, as Phoebe said, we could certainly tailor uh a a survey if we're looking for real um specific information such as your question of like why are um why are teachers not enforcing it? Um, and I think same with the anonymity helps for people to be honest to say um, why are are they feeling like that they can't enforce it or for that 11% that's not in favor of exploring the yonder booth um at bags? Does has that changed now that we see so many schools are using them? Um, how does that impact the number and what questions do they have um about it? So, any questions about that? Questions for Jen? Yeah, I remember hearing a concern that phones were being used often or teachers were asking students to pull their phones out to use them for photography purposes or calculators or a few other examples that I'm curious if that's still happening and how that's going or if it's not if they're not asking them to do that more and if everything is okay as a result of not doing that. So, I think some teachers have made a major change with that. Like, um there's certain things like um there's a math app that you can use where you're doing like quick data polls and you get the information, you scan a QR code and it comes to your phone or math teachers aren't using that anymore. There's ways that you can do that on the laptop instead or you can use an iPad to do that. our um visual art classes met uh those teachers met with Charlie and with me and we have an actual agreement that students sign um that they are able to use their phone to photograph their work and then upload it to the website that we use called Artson Sonia. Uh but that's an example of that was one of my first questions when I went to open house at Portland. um one of their art teachers used to work here at the high school and they said, "What are you doing?" And so they talked about the challenge of that. They've had to invest in cameras um but they've uh had workarounds because when you have a phone in the yonder bag, you don't take it out to um to do something like an activity for class. So we see that that's pretty rare, I would say. Um what what I do see students use uh their phones for when they're using it responsibly is it is a tool where they're they have a notepad on there.

They might be tracking assignments.

They're using the calendar that's on there. Um you know a counter to that is we're so fortunate to have these devices um that we have these laptops that the laptops can do a lot of what students use their phone. Clearly it's convenient because that's with them all the time.

Um, but there's a lot of the features that students use on a phone that you can use on a laptop. At Portland, a big difference is they have Chromebooks.

They don't use um MacBooks. And so our students have access to a lot more on their MacBooks, which are similar to so many kids who have uh a smartphone than it is on a Chromebook. A Chromebook's pretty limited. And some of the the apps and things like that.

So um you mentioned the the laptops. Um, does putting away the phone, however you do it, just make it out of sight, put it in a bag, don't bring it, whatever. Um, are you just are they just I mean, you can text on your computer. Like all the stuff we don't want them doing on their phone, they can do on the computer, right? So, I mean, is there ways to to manage that?

Well, one decision that we decided to do this year is we no longer use Google Chat. um that has not been used at the younger grades and it was used here um and we were seeing that um a a highest percentage of students who were using some students don't use Google chat at all. Some a few classrooms use Google chat as a part of their lessons um which is a great part of that but the majority of kids who are using Google chat were using it to message all throughout the day. They were basically text messaging each other throughout the day. um we did a lot of back and forth of whether we thought that um we should limit it and we decided that um to not have Google chat. There's other ways that students students are brilliant about how they can message one another.

I mean it's like the the form of passing a note in an electronic form. Um but um Google chat it was so quick because we do so much on Google Classroom and with email that Google chat was right below it. Um, and so you could quickly uh do that. We saw some students that had like 80 80 different conversations of that's just like the groups that they were in of sending messages. And so the hope is by removing that um that that has really helped um for for some students to be more focused. But there's other ways that they can definitely find ways to chat with one another.

Danielle, I I get the idea that it's hard for a teacher to manage the phone, putting it in the phone tree, but I'm struggling with how does the yonder bag become something that the teachers are also still not enforcing. I mean, it's still going to be a policy and I'm trying to imagine so all the kids are coming in.

Someone has to be standing there watching them put it in the bag, right?

And then we have to hope that they keep it in the bag throughout the day. um and that they're not unlocking it because a quick Google search of yonder bag, the first thing that popped up was the magnet that you can buy at for9.99 on Amazon. Um so I I guess I'm just struggling with that. I don't know that it takes away 100% of the of the teachers responsibility. So are they going to be willing to still, you know, be enforcing that they're using the bags? because I can't imagine every kid's not some kid's gonna try to take it out of the bag and and use it at some point in time.

So, so I have I can't speak for our teachers because we haven't gotten into that level of detail yet. This was this question of like are we just exploring that right now? Um I can tell you from the student perspective from um and the teacher perspective at Portland. Um so it is a system. It looks you know the yonder bag is small. It looks almost like if you were to have a dry bag and you were putting your phone in there to go kayaking. That's about the size of it. Every single student who walks in the building has to touch, they have people at the doors. There's two doors where you can come in. They're much larger school than us. They're about a thousand students. Um, every student has to touch their bag to the magnet when they walk in. And so when they walk out to go for open campus or to leave at the end of the day, they then also um touch the magnet. So you can imagine they have a traffic jam. I hear about that at home every day. Um and so it's gotten better is what I've heard. They have multiple magnets. So you just and it it is literally like you touch it to it and it magnets. There are ways that um the kids can open them. What I have heard from the teachers though is that the expectation is that your phone is in this bag and so the teachers are faster to say there are no exceptions to this.

Um, and even some students who are opening their bag are not taking it out because those kids can't use it in the bathroom. They can't use it in the lunch time. They can't except that they have open campus there. Um, and so they even if they have the pouch is opened um that they're not taking it out in class because the expectation is that no one will have a phone out. That's anecdotal from the the Portland staff and from the students. The other thing is they're responsible for that bag in the way that our kids are responsible for their device. So if you try to undo the magnet, it often damages it and then the student has to pay for that yonder bag.

Um, and so that's something that I guess the schools that I've heard that are using it are really trying to talk to the students about that about if you like somehow force this bag open likely it's going to break. there's a pin in it that holds it together with the magnet and that pin bends and then the whole thing is broken. So I think there is still some management what I have heard from the teachers because it's all the schools in Portland Dearing and Casco Bay are using it as well. Um I just happen to have a Portland high schooler and what the teachers have said is that it is much more rare that they're seeing phones out at all. Um, and when they do, they are feeling like this is this constant a consistent schoolwide policy and they are more apt to then send a student to the office or send the student's phone to the office. But I don't know about our students. So there's definitely still no matter what there's classroom management um in it.

But I think um the percentage of that versus a teacher has um you know three classes in a day plus advisory and so you're doing that every single day at the beginning of every single class saying put your phone up, put your phone up, put your phone and there's no profile for kids who will do it willingly or argue. There's kids all the all different kids across both ends of the spectrum um of how they are attached to their phone or not. And some kids have no problem with it and put it right in before the teacher even asks. and some kids it's a fight every day.

I I wonder if if the um I mean what one thing we saw in both was sort of the inconsistent application of the policy.

And I wonder if that's because their phones are available to them in their bags and whatever. Um or if it's because you can have it, you can't have it. You can have it. You can have it between classes, but you can't have it in class.

You can have it at lunch, but you can't have it in advisory. like the the switching back and forth. I wonder if that creates more issues that um you know I I'm struggling with the yonder bags a bit. I know we're not talking we're just asking questions, but I'm curious of schools that have done a bell to bell without the bags and it's it's still a policy. There's no phones out. If we see a phone, it's gone. Um whether it's at lunch, whether it's in anywhere. um you eliminate the logistics of the bags. You eliminate the sort of perceived taking of control from the kids, which we saw in in the theory. You eliminate the need for the trees, which is clearly a pain point for everybody to manage. Um and it's just we don't see phones in the building. If if you want to leave it in your car, great. If you want to leave it in the bottom of your bag and I don't see it, fine, too. Um, I wonder if there are schools that have taken that approach and if they have better or worse results than the bags.

Well, so I could just speak to that for a second. Is Windom High School doing that policy this year? They just they just started that uh off and away basically is what they call it. Um, and it's there's no bags. Uh, and I was in this assistant principles group with them down at Wendom and they say it's going surprisingly well. I was kind of skeptical like really they're just doing it but they said it's going surprisingly well but it's still very early and you know they need more information but I know they have that basically that's their policy went went to my school this year off and away they call it.

Yeah. Um and you know maybe to Phoe's point there's a stack on hand for folks that might need a little extra support.

You know you have some of the bags if if people need them.

So, one of the um one of the examples that we recently received from the concerned citizens group was about Camden where I spent most of my career and was there until pretty recently. So, I actually had a phone conversation with the assistant principal at Camden Hills High School who is a my colleague down the hall for a long time and also a friend. Um her insight was that they have gone with the yonder bags this year. um it has gone surprisingly well um in terms of the implementation and the push back from students. She said that many kids have defaulted to arriving at school and saying they don't have their phone, but maybe it's in their bag. Um but regardless, they're not seeing the phones. They've largely reserved the yonder bags which they purchased for special cases of repeat offenders who just won't comply.

Um, you know, they're obviously not going to search kids backpacks if they say, "I don't have my phone." They're not going they're going to take them at their word unless there's reason to believe otherwise. Um, she did mention a few other insights that they have gained and they're only what six weeks into this. Um, she said that kids crave interaction and attention and when they don't have their act their phones available, they're seeking interaction and attention. There's a lot more horseplay. There's a lot more, you know, things that people of my generation might have seen um in the hallways, but that's not necessarily a bad thing. She also said um in uh they had had a fight in the hallway not too long ago and it was a pretty serious fight and she was amazed that not a single kid took their phone out to put the fight on social media before administration could even get down the hall to respond to the fight. Um, so that's just some anecdotal evidence from one of the schools that has been cited as a as a model.

I think if we were going to um survey our staff, that would be a great question. Um, would would they be in favor of doing something that was a a bell-to-bell ban with no device to support that, like a no yonder bag, or would they feel like the way um to do that would be that they would need a device um that they would need some sort of equipment to help with the bell-to-bell ban? I can't answer that for staff, but I think if we were tailoring a survey, that would be a question that I would love to ask.

Maybe it's the first step, right? I mean, I think it's the free step, which I I like. Um, you know, and to see if is it enough? And maybe it's not. And, you know, there's nothing that says you can't be like, "All right, well, step two is everybody gets a yonder bag." Um, because we're not seeing the results we would hope to see out of it. And maybe the middle school can speak about this.

I know that in Portland in the middle schools, they felt like it wasn't enough and that's why they have the yonder bags because it was a bell-to-bell ban. Um it was supposed to be watches um um watches, phones, and headphones. And obviously, you know, some like especially sixth and seventh graders fewer in Portland have um a device. Um, but they still felt I I was like my rule following daughter if she ever watches this would be so upset with me. But she is a innate rule follower and I don't think she ever took her watch off that she had a watch and um I think they found it hard to manage and and they have shifted to those bags. I you know I can't speak for their administrative team but as a parent that's what I was watching. Um but I do know that it's much more common in a middle school to have that bell-to-bell ban. uh where it's just like you can't have them, we don't see them. Um which is similar to our schools and um you know um are you teeing them up? I you know what I'm Well, I was just gonna say like and I'm not an expert, but I wouldn't be shy of like like scaring them like being like we are considering these pouches like if if the policies aren't being followed whatever policy comes out of these discussions Like we've seen it happen last year. Our like student section at sports games got very very very regulated because it was super disrespectful and it wasn't a good environment. And this year there was a couple situations where that was it was starting to go in that direction. and our athletic director like said to students, reminded students of the rules in the student section and asked a couple of leaders like make sure that it's being respectful and it turned around really fast. So like I think that tactic like can work to be like this is a real possibility and if students aren't falling into line like your phone's getting locked away.

Yeah. I mean, you know, it it I think it gives some respect to the kids, right, that say they can manage. Great. Let's see you manage and believe until, you know, trust but verify. I will say because this was a question that came up last year was some um I can't remember who on the board was asking when students do have the opportunity to have their phone, are we seeing just like 580 faces on their phone? And we're not. That's not what lunch looks like. There's lots of banter at lunch.

Sometimes we're like maybe just sit down and look at your phone and be quiet. Um but that's not what we want them to do.

But um but I think that is not what we've seen. Um I think it depends studentto student. There's some students that we can identify who every second that they can get at their phone then they want it in their hand and there's other students who are still engaging when they have the opportunity. So there is that balance that we see. But that was a question that came up last year.

It's not that we're seeing every student headbent at lunch or breakfast on their phones. That's not what it looks like. Colin, um yeah, thanks so much for this, Jenna.

I this question is I mean it's this is borderline um I guess philos too philosophical question, but I guess I keep writing down try to like write down variations on this question and I keep going back to the same thing. And I guess this is also for Phoebe as well, but it's like how shared is the understanding of why you're in school?

Okay, that's pretty philosophical for but I don't I don't but I don't but I don't mean it I don't mean it in like a super philosophical naval gazy way. I I I guess I'm just I'm just thinking about how like there is a goal to the thing.

like there's a goal to being in school and there's a reason why we're doing it and the and uh both the teachers and the students are part of that are part of that contract. Arguably the students uh have less choice um about whether or not they've sort of um of of being there or not while the teachers have all chosen to be teachers and therefore they have chosen to be part of that like achieving that goal. But I don't know. I guess I just sort of wonder whether like has that come up at all or is that something that could perhaps be a point of conversation to to sort of say like um like what are we supposed to be doing during these during this period? Like it's is it it's not about trust or lack of trust or it's not about like agency or lack of agency um or punishment or reward, but it's about like what are we actually trying to accomplish? Well, there's there's two sides to that.

So when I was a first year teacher, a veteran teacher said to me, "The sooner that you realize you're just in their way than of hanging out with their friends, the better off you'll be." I was like, "Okay." And she's like, "You you have to get them in somehow because they're showing up to be a part of this community." Now, there's lots of kids who are incredibly driven and that's why they're here. What we tried to do last year that Phoebe was talking about was right at the beginning of the year kind of our our statement that we were saying is like you need a break from your phone. That was the first thing we were saying and then we shared this data sheet with all the teachers and all the students that was concrete data facts about how many students had now they were the these were research studies from all over the country. we were kind of pulling in resources. Um, and it said, you know, the percentage of students who had increased their overall GPA when they were using phones less, when they were more focused in class, that they were um they were ultimately more successful in school. And so, I think we definitely tried to message that of like this this is about you taking a break and being able to better focus on what you're doing. Um I think different students have different goals.

Um but we certainly have messaged that to all of them. Um but we know that the social element of high school is a a critical part. We want kids to feel connected. We want them to feel connected to each other and um and and to staff. And so, um, I think that, um, that trying to get them to understand that this could potentially be something that is very helpful according to research that has been uh, conducted is that you are less distracted when you don't have your phone and you're in a class. That's what the research has overwhelmingly shown.

Um, I have two different questions that are um, what one of them is something I hear from the students kind of consistently when we talk about a possible ban is that they feel less safe with that um, because they don't have their phone with them in whatever case might happen. Have you heard that at all from the teachers? any any sort of of semblance of feeling less safe or is that pretty much solely only coming from the students?

Uh you mean have the teachers get we haven't asked that question. That's a great question. Like we haven't asked the teachers if they are concerned about students safety, but I think the protocols that we practice here and that we teach our staff, they don't have anything to do with students having cell phones. And so I'm sure they've thought about it, especially um if they are a parent, if they're a guardian, if they have that perspective as well. Um and they might feel very differently. I've certainly heard in in my personal life, I've heard people on both sides feeling like it's a safety concern. No, it's not a safety concern because the school has protocols to keep you safe and to react um to if there was an emergency. But I I've certainly heard students say that and we saw that in the feedback, but not specifically from from teachers. It didn't come up in the survey.

Okay. And my other question was, have we thought about kind of incorporating a more consistent more kind of constant um teaching on phone like responsible phone usage in like a wellness curriculum? I mean over and above kind of just having a an assembly or a um kind of a single time um speaker come in to speak to the kids. So that's what Charlie had mentioned. That was that organization that we looked into and are still potentially looking into that it's a different perspective that's talking about and um you know Charlie has done a lot more research on this than I have. Um but it's talking about the mindset towards your phone and teaching that and um and we haven't had a lot of conversations. You know Phoebe can talk about this of if it's happened in classrooms. we haven't had as much of conversation talking specifically right with the seniors and the juniors to say, you know, there are times when you're in a career that you cannot have your phone. Um the region 10 kids have experienced that because there's lots of their programs where they cannot have a phone. it's locked in a box because it's not safe to have your phone when you're welding and you're using or you're using power tools or you're in early childhood and you're working with small children, you don't have your phone. Our kids who go over to More Street, they don't take their phone. Um, and so I think like those conversations certainly can happen more. I don't know, Phoebe if you've had those conversations in classrooms or not. It's not something that we've done in an assembly. we've looked into bringing this person in, but we've done more about like your academics.

Yeah. Was your question more like was it about like built into curriculum or like a specific class or just like kind of assembly type of thing?

Yeah. My question was if we've looked into kind of teaching responsible phone usage as like part of a wellness curriculum as a whole and having it kind of be a constant thing that we we teach kids, not just a a once or once or twice thing.

So I mean I think that we've connected it. It's um you know a lot of the research is about how social media impacts your mental wellness and so all of our students take a health class predominantly our 10th graders do but they only take it for a semester. Um and so there's a lot of focus in that class about mental health. And so but um you know that the surgeon general's warning that came out when he did that uh study was specifically about social media more than saying cell phones. And so I I do know that that is a topic that comes up in that class, but more about like responsible um cell phone use. I don't know that that's a big part of their curriculum right now. It's not to say that we couldn't um but I certainly know that it's connected to mental health. I do think it's a part of the middle school curriculum, right? Like the what was library turns into like multimedia. And I think they talk about it there.

Now Michelle's teing them up.

Michelle's doing that. Michelle will I got a plane to catch. Any other questions?

I was I'm happy to bring up Will Pitten. Oh, Cara. Yeah. And Bill Ridge.

Yeah. So, if Bill and Will want to come up and start getting ready, uh Cara has a question for Jen first.

I might have three, but I'm going to I will make it quick. I just wanted to echo the curriculum point that I feel like every class probably has an opportunity to speak about digital citizenship and um and so I would really like I would really encourage that exploration for each for each class each year for so that it is something that's talked about more than just the beginning of the year or uh in a workshop format. So I I appreciate you bringing that up. Um, and then as far as the safety question too, I would love to hear what the teachers think about that because I think like you said, there are two sides to that. And I wonder how many teachers would be concerned that if there was an emergency and all the students are on their phones messaging people instead of following the drills that they've been or well not a drill but following the rules that the teachers are um trying to um enforce in terms of in terms of the safety drill. That's what I'm Okay. And I still have one more thing but if this related to that go for it.

Okay. I I can't speak to how the teachers here feel about it. I don't know. Um I do feel somewhat compelled to share my perspective as an administrator in responding to emergency situations where cell phones are part of the mix.

And I understand the question about safety is primarily geared toward a a highly traumatic violent event in a school like a shooter coming into a school. And you know the times in which we live we all think about these things.

I have found myself in much more common types of situations like a fake bomb threat in a school or a a chemical from a science lab leaks in a school and we have to go into a lockdown. These these are much more common things. And this the kids with easy access to their phones have in my this is my view have really diminished the safety of the situations because what we have found is kids on their phones in classrooms texting their parents not knowing what's going on putting on social media inaccurate statements about what's going on provoking a public furer causing maybe a stream of concerned parents to arrive at the school while the administrators are still trying to figure out what's happening. And so I think with a broad view of the way that cell phones in the hands of kids in a high stress situation speaks to safety as a whole. My experience has been that it it has been a complicating factor.

Um, and my my third question, something I'd be curious to hear from other districts who have implemented a bell-to-bell policy is if it has had any impact on attendance and I'm curious what your thoughts are on that if if it would have a negative impact on attendance. Would would kids not come to school or would they if they know that they can't have their phones throughout the day?

That's a great question. I don't I don't know that I can project that because I think um I'm hoping that our goal work is going to be so awesome that they're all going to come to school whether they have their phone or not. Uh that's a great question. I don't know that um that we've had any schools near us that have had this in place long enough where we could see some examples of what has impacted attendance or not. I I think you could project that there are some students that are so upset by this policy that they um decide that they're not coming to school. I'm not sure that I would prioritize that as if if I was just being asked my opinion. I don't know that that would be the biggest impact on attendance. I think that we have other factors that really significantly impact attendance for some of our students. But it would be interesting to see because um schools around us who are implementing this right now will have clear attendance data and see are they seeing a correlation or as Phoebe was saying if we did another survey, you know, it could be something that we could ask. Um but they might say I'm not coming. Yeah, I'm not coming. Yeah. And so that might be a hard one to to project. Um I'm I'm hoping that there are enough other things that would draw them here. I feel like we are focused on the challenges that will happen when they are here more than their phone making them not come to school at all. But but it's a it's a it's a great question. a wondering one other quick wonder. If we asked them if they wanted to have to take math or ELA, I wonder what they would say. If we gave them the choice, I can't offend our math teachers.

I gave an alter of ELA because some kids are going to really love math and want to go to math and some kids really want to go to ELA, but some kids really don't want to do those things. And kind of to Colin's point, like there's a reason why we're here to and why those classes are required.

I do know that that a teacher from another school said to me like, "My kid would eat candy and chicken fingers all the time if they could if I didn't say this is what I think is healthy for you and good for you." And at what point did they make that choice for themselves and do we make for them? I think that that's a challenge for us to to determine.

I'm happy to answer more questions, but they look excited to Yeah, we're gonna we're gonna get them up and see what they have to those ready.

Good evening. Uh, thanks for having us.

I'm Bill Ridge for those of you that don't me know me. Uh, assistant principal at the middle school. I'm a little bit bigger than Jen.

Uh I just wanted to start by kind of reviewing quickly what our current policy is so you just have that reference. Uh as it's written uh the phone there's excuse me there's a phone in the office for students when they need to call home. Students cell phones or personal electronic devices are all allowed are not allowed excuse me uh to be used in the school 7:30 to 220 which is our operating hours. Uh cell phones and other personal electronic devices must be stored in the student's backpack or locker. And if the cell phone or other technology is observed is turned into the main office on a second offense, uh administration will contact parents and create a phone plan. Um so you know the phone plan what that might look like. Uh depending on if it's the second or third or fourth offense, uh a designated amount of days that that phone would be checked into the office to start the day, checked out at the end of the day. um in that would be done in tandem with and I know that this isn't speaking directly to the point of more education on this uh we have access to seven mindsets base for those of you that are FMS parents you may have heard of that uh it's a basically it's a comprehensive mindset based learning module uh one of the lessons or one of the modules uh specifically targets responsible technology use so um we go through those modules with guidance counselor uh and so forth in response respon to it. Uh, phone offenses. We gave a similar um survey to all of our staff.

I'm just going to review that pretty quickly. I'm going to kind of like summarize as best I can. Um, like Jen, there was an opportunity for more of a narrative. Um, which I will try to do my best to to give you a a snapshot of what the feelings were. Uh the first question that was asked was what is the perceived impact of cell phone use uh on learning?

Uh 36% of our staff that um completed the survey said no, it's not a problem.

It's not a big problem. Uh that left the rest of it 64% in some fashion to say yes, it is an it's an area of need or or concern.

uh that ranged from 29% saying maybe once a week it becomes a problem for me, once a day at 18% or multiple times uh per day was 18% as well.

The one thing I would point out in all of this is the responses responses varied oftent times depending on the role within the building. Okay? So, for example, um if you took our school guidance counselor for instance, she might report that cell phone use is a major concern because what she's dealing with oftentimes is the fallout of a social conflict that stemmed from technology, social media, so forth. Um whereas you might check in with a classroom teacher who would report that the day-to-day um there's not much of an an impact on the student learning. So, um I just, you know, I take all of that data with a grain of salt because I think it is very it really depends on um who's reporting. The second question we asked was specifically about the yonder bags.

Interestingly enough, in my opinion, uh where we had only where we had 36% of um staff saying that it was not a problem, uh 54% of staff said that they would support the use of a yonder bag. Uh 18% said that they would not support that or they would not be in support of that.

And there was 28% that had some sort of mixed reaction or or conditional statement that was placed along with it.

Um, some of the themes that came out of the yonder bag question that were pro- yonder bag was that it uh teachers that were in support of it were citing that there would be an improved focus. They imagined that there would be a reduced temptation uh and better social engagement.

Colin asked about the punishment earlier. We're going to phrase that a little differently. We called it conditional support. Okay. Um, this is for our highfrequency offenders um that our staff was saying, you know, there was a group of staff that said, you know, maybe it's more of like a high school need or maybe it's a need for in response to a student that just cannot get over that temptation. Um, you know, right now that would be drop it in the office. Um, so that was just kind of a similar use to the yonder bag whereas right now we put it in the office. Um either way that would be part of a planned response from those teachers perspective. Uh those teachers that were skeptical of it or opposed it most of the questions came from whether the impact was significant enough at the middle middle school level to justify the cost logistics um the inconvenience of it.

Uh some of the broader themes that came out of the discussions that we had were that while the majority of teachers recognize that yeah there's probably an impact that most of the issues seem to arise outside of the direct instruction time. Uh so that would be like for example uh I heard I've heard a lot of you talk about bathroom use. Um free periods aren't necessarily an option at the middle school but maybe like transition times would be a better example. Uh or downtime. uh not necessarily like it's not being seen as this in-class defiance necessarily. Um the other area that we talked a lot about was that many teachers had commented or noted that when expectations are clear uh the students really are doing generally a good job of kind of going with that flow and following those expectations.

Um, we also talked a lot, I think this was just getting touched on at the end, uh, quite a bit, but that there was a really common emphasis from all teachers that middle schoolers are very much in in um, a a period of time where they're learning to be responsible with phone use. And the suggestion was made often from teachers that there should be an import an emphasis placed on teaching digital responsibility, not just restricting the access to it. Um and then the final thought that was kind of a broader theme was uh with regard to the yonder bags um teachers did actually bring up at the middle school level concerns about um during an emergency situation um the cost of them uh implementing uh the logistics of them. Um, so yeah, so the big picture, what we kind of said at FMS at least was that we all largely uh recognized that cell phones can be a distraction that we um we think that they can be manageable with some clear expectations and planned responses uh to repeat offenders.

And then that with moderate support um even though there's uh moderate support for the yonder bags, the overall sentiment seemed to be that more like context specific uh developmentally appropriate type approaches rather than like a one-sizefits-all for the whole middle school population would be more appropriate. So um yeah, I think it's a lot of repeating if I keep going on. So I'll take any questions. Yeah, just a quick one. When was this survey given? This fall. Thank you. Yeah. Uh middle September.

And I will say uh one comment from the teachers was that if this survey was given um last year, it would have had a different feel. Um and that was um largely it it felt like a different population of kids that we had last year um in a lot of ways. So, um, that's credit, I think, to the students that we have at the middle school right now and that they're respecting the rule and they're kind of finding that finding that line. So, so you're saying Jen's freshman class.

Just I mean, just doing the math there, Bill. I did not say that. Actually, they're not here anymore. I don't know where they went. You said that, Michelle. Not me. Of course, they're awesome. Yeah.

Uh, so I'm curious. So, Obviously a bell-to-bell, you know, policy in place now. Yeah.

Um I guess I'm surprised to see that 65% still see it as an area of Oh, I guess my first question is how many people did the survey?

28 out of roughly 50 edte and teaching staff were invited to ser uh the survey.

Okay, so 28. So a little over 50%. Okay, thank you. um that 18% have an issue daily. Now when I guess so maybe it's how you interpret the question, right? Like impacting learning to your your example of the the guidance counselor where something may have happened off school grounds but it was related to cyber something. um she might say yes or he might say yes that's that's impacting learning but it wasn't like their phone was they they took their phone out in class. So um yeah and to be fair um really technically 36% would say at least once a day because we had 18 at once a day and we had 18% also at multiple times per day. Oh okay.

So um so a third of the people are saying they're dealing with they're seeing a phone once a day.

That's five people in each category. Um yeah, I think that you would see a lot of um like related service uh guidance type staff with that multiple times would be my guess without looking directly at it. Um and then the other area that we would have more occurrences would be uh staff that's doing um maybe like lunch recess duties. I think that's an area where we could be stronger. Um so so they're not allowed but they're taking them out anyway. Exactly. Okay. Yeah. Yep. Okay. Thank you. Yeah.

Ken.

Um, thank you so much for for that. I think um I I guess my question is it's probably not related to the data specifically, but I'm just curious whether um there's any sense or you just have any sort of gut sense of if there was a bell-to-bell policy in the high school whether that would make things easier downstream. In other words, um knowing that uh uh there there's no cell phones in the in their in their academic future for the next couple of years. Um whether that I don't know in any way kind of impacts the way in which uh I don't know the way in which sort of students would understand that or the way in which the enforcement would look.

Are you asking like a policy such as ours where it's just written that it's a bell to bell off in a way or are you asking if there was a yonder bag? Oh, that's a good Yeah, I guess I I guess either. So, I I don't know on the yanderbag. Um, and for the policy, I would say it would be unfair for me to make that call. Um, there's too many factors, I think, when you compare the high school to a middle school setting that just don't relate.

Um, for instance, you have, you know, a a seventh grader at Freeport Middle School has his or her five teachers and they're in their wing, right, for the day. Um whereas a high schooler is traveling throughout the building, sees their teacher once for 75 minutes every other day. Um yeah, I just don't know that that'd be fair for me to compare.

I'm just going to say I really appreciate you pushing back on that question and saying I'm not going to answer it because that would not be appropriate. I appreciate that.

Well, I know I know No, no. Again, no, I just I think that's that's great. That's awesome. Thank you, Anna.

Do you find that you're seeing cell phones appear more in times of like socializing like free time, recess or lunch or where they're outside of the academic classroom where it's easier maybe to pull out your phone like there isn't a teacher who can catch them.

Yeah, I would say that I'm not seeing it that in that way, but I would say that there's more suspicion of it in those settings like the bathroom use, I think, is where most teachers are have their biggest concern. Um, we're not patting kids down when they go to the bathroom, right? So, it's very likely that students can go to the bathroom and bring their cell phone with them at this time. Um, I think that's where if if you were asking me where the major concern is, that would be it. um in in passing time in the hallway, I don't see it as a concern. Um in lunch and recess, it it's minimal. Um so, no, I don't think, you know, I think that there are areas that um I I think there are times of our day that are less structured that would lend itself to them uh taking out those cell phones. But I am not personally observing that to a much higher degree than you know if I were to observe a classroom and a kid slides it out.

Right. So thank you. And then one other question.

Um you had mentioned that teachers had raised cost as a concern for like the yonder bags as one thing that they were worried about. Did any did they get any information about the cost the potential cost for yonder bags?

I think Tom has that. He got it from I think Tom has that from Sam.

But they the teachers didn't No, I think that was speculation. Yeah. Got it. Yeah. Thank you.

Oh, sorry. I thought you were asking if we had it for him to share with you. Well, I' I'd love to hear that. Yeah. I can tell I'm noting the irony.

Yeah. Excuses, excuses, time.

Wonderful 50%.

And do we know how long they last? I don't know the answer to that.

Oh, I realize I'm not on here. Um, I don't know the answer to that. I know that there are problems with them breaking. Uh, I've heard anecdotally that sometimes you put the phone in and it it's the phone is the bag is small and if it's a large phone and you're trying to put a phone and a watch in, that could be problematic. But we charge for them the way it was mentioned. You know, we do with our technology items.

All right, Will, you're up.

You show up late, you go last. That's the rule. I was told I was last. Whatever. But I appreciate the sentiment.

So, um, good. I'm Will Pen, principal at D Community School. The um there a number of questions have been sort of fired around. So I'll just start by perhaps speaking to a couple of those things. Um we do teach digital citizenship um in middle grades as Michelle said. Um the program that is lent on is from Common Sense Media. That has been the one that has been in place for a number of years. I would say to you that is not specific about phones. It's specific about digital citizenship.

So it really ranges from what is your digital footprint? How do you are you aware of and uh know how to respond to different um challenges or dangers that come with online um presence etc etc. So they do about cyber bullying, they do about information and media literacy, they do about digital footprint, privacy and safety in terms of big data and that gets woven in over um over the years um that we use through multimedia which is taught through library class. Um just a quick um heads up I would say that student feedback is they feel their parents are more addicted to phones than they are. So, and I think that is a big reminder to all of us that it's one thing to um be looking at this from one through one lens. And I know that our lens is very much about distractions in school, don't get me wrong, but um it might be interesting too if teachers had their phones in yonder bags and parents had their phones in yonder bags in restaurants and everything else. Um in response to um couple of questions that have bounced around about using a small selection of yonder bags for those students who really struggle um we had actually contacted them a couple of years ago with that very question um and they had said that is not something they support um they are full at that time at least they were full implementation or zero implementation they wanted to make a they being yonder I don't mean like down the road but um the company. Their emphasis they said was that they view their product as a preventative support for children, not as a consequence. I think they also view it as a business model. Um slightly cynically, but um we said we'd be happy to pilot we said we'd be happy to pilot 10 of them and see what we think of them, but it was um not an option. So whether that has changed, I don't know. Um and I do think there's a certain alert to that opportunity.

And um before I just share the data, one thing I would just push out for thinking um and I want to stress this is at the middle school level. I don't I'm not saying that middle school should impact or be a reflection of what happens in high school. Developmentally the kids are in a very different place. Um, I would say again going to your question a moment ago, Colin, um, the prospect of a middle schooler knowing that they would not have access to a phone in high school, would that limit them in investing in their use in a middle school? I think that was your question.

I'd say to you that I don't think so. I mean, we also know that math's going to get harder in high school, so we should invest in our middle school math right now. And um, surprisingly, that leverage is limited. Um but um wishful thinking um the um I would just also state that you know we have the phone usage is not a big problem for us um the um and I would stress that we have a variety of rules in school and um that they aren't always followed um that they do require reminders and they do require followthrough um and we have some individuals for whom it requires additional teaching um reminders and yes consequences um as part of a you know comprehensive approach to helping somebody um develop better habits or or be responsive to the expectations and norms of a school or of society. Um so we sort of view the phone usage is now in that same kind of um ballpark if you like around sort of expectations and norms of what it means to be a school citizen. Um, would it be nice if we had no phones at all?

Absolutely. I've taught long enough to know exactly what that was like and um, it was certainly advantageous. Um, I think the biggest challenges we have at school actually do involve parents on phones and that is parents texting their child um, with things that in the past they didn't need to. They just, you know, we've always maintained you can call the school if you need to speak to your child or convey a message to them.

about little things that might be as simple as um what time is practice or where was the game tonight or you know where you know did you put the dog out.

I mean these sort of things that if some of this could be appeased if if you know and again it's a small number but for some parents were so used to instant connection with their children that that's filling a different need and a different bucket. Um so I think there's a number of factors at play in this whole conversation. Again, I want to keep stressing at the middle school level. I do think it's a different thing um at the high school level. So, we did ask um when this question was added to the um uh board agenda for a conversation, we had reached out to the staff, our staff who work with middle schoolers. It's certainly not something we see in our lower grades. Um and um so that is uh let's see would be 17 total educators were asked uh of which 12 responded um question you found cell phone usage by students to cause distractions in learning 75% so no it's not a big problem uh 25% so you know three people said maybe once a day um the said students students tend to be um good at abiding by the expectation. Our expectations, by the way, I should have said, very similar to FMS as Bill said.

Um the expectation is students may have a phone with them, but they cannot be out. Um they're they're expected to not to be out in school if they need to utilize it or they're they ask a teacher and they're very good about that. So it might be that weather has made the sports cancelled and they're like can I call my home to let them know that I'm going on the bus or you know that practice has been cancelled and um or they might say something like I've forgotten this may I call my parent a lot of the times we put them onto the school phone to do so but other times if if they need to um if a if a teacher was there and they give them permission.

Um would you support RS5 students in grades 6 through 12 being required to use yonder bags? And this was interesting. Um 50% were like yes, even though it's not necessarily an issue. Um and um 25% were no. And then there's a couple of people like yes for high school but not really for middle school or not for DCS. I mean that's obviously their lens. Um the I want to know how it's going to be implemented. And part of that I think is the sense of like if we can um remove a temptation or remove a cause of stress or worry from students lives, we'd love to be able to do so. So I also think if there was a yonder bag for anxiety, we'd be all over buying that. Um, so you know, I think that's a big factor for some of the teachers who said, "I don't see phone use as a problem, but I know how in the world it seems to be a problem." And if this removes that issue for kids, then we'd be certainly interested in learning about what that means. Um, most issues with phones that manifest at school were not generated at school. There'll be out of school hours, weekends, evenings, things like that. um those factors do come into the school world. We are at times expected to then resolve those challenges um which is tricky but that is nothing that um removing you know a yonder bag is going to solve for us because this has happened outside of those settings.

Um I'm not sure if there's anything else you'd like to hear or if you have questions.

Questions for Will Chris?

Sorry. Uh, this isn't so much a question for you, but you did bring up that the the kids say that their parents are more addicted than their than they are. Um, and so I think that something that as a board we should really consider is to tie with this policy that we're we're talking about this education piece for the for these kids. And not just on social media, not just digital literacy, but I mean literally phone usage. We we talk about it multiple times. I've heard the the word addiction in response to the phone usage here. So, um I think that would be a very good way for us to kind of incorporate the student kind of buyin in that in we're not just doing this as a punishment. We're doing this and this is why.

Yeah. I mean, just expand the education piece to whole family education, not just the kids, right?

And I do think that technology goes with that through every as facet, right? So whether it be social media, the age of these children, a lot of it might be Minecraft. Um so there's a range, right, from Minecraft through Tik Tok to whatever else they might stumble into.

Um but um the um yeah, there's definitely a role across every facet of it.

Thank you all. I meant to ask this also for Freeport Middle School. Um, could you talk a little bit about your laptop policy and if there's been any major challenges like Jen had mentioned Google chats and having to stop that?

Yeah, I think she referenced to we've not had Google chat for a number of years. I mean, I think the first time it came available within like a month we're like, okay, this isn't going to work.

Um, but as she also referenced that um early adolescence will find a way, right? I mean, the most important thing for them is to feel like they belong. If there's a way of belonging and especially if they have tight restrictions at home on technology or they may be someone who doesn't have a phone then they're going to try to belong in some other way. Um that's just developmental. Um so you know when we took away chat then initially what started to pop up was kids creating a shared Google doc and then just using that as a platform to chat right. Um, baby's like, "Why are you outing us?" I mean, it's no different than the notes we used to fold in very intricate ways like, "Do you want to go out?" Yes. No.

Check the box. I mean, it's the same idea. You just create a survey.

I think the note may have been in your pocket for longer, though, to find that moment. It's not just like sand, sand, sand. So, so anyway, it kind of Yeah, that's right. Now you can break up with multiple people simultaneously. Um, I think the um so there is a facet to technology that um there are some distractions. I think there are distractions even if we're using it to do a you know a search. I think back to when, again, this sort of dates me if my hairstyle didn't, but um when technology first became available in schools, you know, like 30 years ago, the um everything was on discs, right?

It was very restricted. When the internet first became available, people were like really nervous about it. And so everything was everything that students were working on were in quote unquote basically web quests that the teacher had um curated and you know I think increasingly um and understandably why society has come to say there's all these amazing things we can't keep up with trying to say okay it becomes restrictive it becomes censorship pretty quickly. I mean, I was just looking at the amazing books uh bookshelf display over here that the librarians put together about censored books and you know the vast majority of the internet would be on that shelf. And so it was it has moved over the last 25 years of really being quite tightly restricted to being like how does society kind of um interface with this constantly evolving um tool.

And so, you know, I think everyone's already talked about it, but it's that sense about um, you know, what are healthy habits, what are an awareness of what are realistic temptations, whether it be from removing sodas from school vending machines to like having healthy lunches, whether what does that look like on a technology front. Um, so it is a challenge and this is not to dismiss for the kiddos for home. They are really attached to their phone. That is the factor. is going to the bathroom for like 15 minutes because they're going to check out their phone. They can't do it in sight of anyone without it being taken. So, and then those particular situations require particular plans.

Much different at the middle school than the high school.

Other questions for Will? There's benefits to going last. We've asked all the questions we have already.

Yeah, but I still came back and answered that. You did? Yeah. We appreciate that. Okay. Okay.

Thank you. Thank you.

Okay. Um so I think we have heard from everyone who um who had prepared remarks for us tonight. Uh we've got the information on some cost information. Um is yonder the only option? Do we know?

I'm looking at you, Tom.

I They're the only one that has that commitment to preventative, not uh punitive. Uh everybody else, all the competitors are are more punitive.

I don't know of others. Okay.

I thought I heard about a used option or something like that. That they come broken. Great. I don't know if that's a good option.

They come broken. Yeah. Yeah, I think waiting a long time.

So, um Colin has something to say. It's big intake of breath.

I do have something to say. I have a question for Phoebe um and maybe for any of the um administrators and teachers out there. I guess I'm curious. Is there uh Jen, I think you you put it that we're standing on a like opposite shores or there's a sense of the teachers, the administrators, and the and the students standing at opposite shores um on this.

Um, and I asked that question, I guess, about sort of goals or kind of like what you kind of want out of the want out of the the t school. And I appreciate Jen you talking about that that real like social that social need. I guess I'm just curious if there's like is there something that I don't want to say like that we could package uh with the cell phone policy, but if is there is there anything that that is there anything else that you feel Phoebe that the administration or the teachers like um aren't hearing the students on that doesn't have to do with cell phones that would kind of like um I don't know help the student body feel heard um in a way um I don't know like is is this the most important thing like is this is this is are cell phones the most important thing that would like and this would totally if if a policy was introduced it would like completely ruin the experience or is there something else that like that the student body wants uh that would sort of improve uh the student experience of high school that we could kind of think about as a way to again I don't I don't mean to like say like tit for tat or kind of like but like I don't know I'm just curious does anything come to mind on that one.

Um well now that the chocolate milk is back I was totally going to say the chocolate milk took away our the chocolate milk would have been a really good one but they brought it back. Um, I don't know.

Miss Skoka and Mr. Melanie, can you think of anything that's like an I think the phones are like a really a a big deal on in everyone's brains.

I don't know if everybody knows that we got chocolate milk back when we introduced the cell phone tree. It was like kind of magical last year. Um, I mean the only thing that I would add, Phoebe, is that when we were just at um at the Rue Institute with the student leadership because I was there with the kids and there was a visualization activity that we did of like closing your eyes and what does your school look like when you walked in and universally with all of the kids, it was about like comforting spaces, places where kids could be together, which um we We have that in here. We have this beautiful space in here, but this is a quiet space where um kids are usually focused and working in here. Um, but it is one of the things I don't know if you want to talk about that because that was a big piece of something that we don't have here is that and I guess what I'm hearing you say Colin is like if you didn't have your phones but you did have more areas where you could be together um is that is that some sort of solution that would tie to the conversation that we had at at the at Northeastern.

Right. So I guess solution, but also just that that it like would would enable you to feel heard because I think that's the other piece is I think it's the sort of sense of I don't I don't want to I don't want this conversation to be about like not listening to the student voice as you as you as you put it.

Yeah. I think honestly a lot of times um when it comes to things like this students do really feel heard. this district and the high school has put a lot of work into making sure that's the case. And from my position here and being on the student leadership team, we are trying really hard to make sure that is true. I think the phone situation is a unique one where it is just like it is a really big divide. Um, but most other issues there's a lot more common ground. And I think there is common ground here. It just might take a little bit of work and communication and education to make that common ground like bigger.

Yeah, I think that's I appreciate that Pho because um it's not just kids, right, that we hear from that they don't feel heard, right?

So, I wonder uh at Jen's um congratulations on winning the scholarship, by the way, to that civil discourse, but there is a difference between not acquiescing and not hearing someone, right? We hear a lot of feedback um you know particularly on highly contentious issues which this this very well could fall into um and when we don't take the position of whoever the speaker might be they say you're not hearing me and I don't know how we approach the the discussion about how to have a discussion that just because I don't agree with you doesn't mean I didn't hear you um and I don't respect you and I don't respect your opinion. Um, so you know, maybe that's something to come back into the conversation, too, cuz you know, when you hear that, you know, on on almost everything, we feel heard and we feel like it's a it's a collaboration together, like that's what we're going for. Um, but, you know, maybe to Cara's point of like if we just said, well, just take whichever classes you want. If you don't want math, don't take math. I mean, we can't go that far, right? And I think that's I mean and that seems obvious to most people, maybe not to everybody, but um you know there has to be a point where we have to make the take the position. So um maybe I'm getting philosophical now that it's 10:00 at night, but um just that idea of how to have that conversation and you know not be on opposite shores.

Yeah. In that vein, Michelle, I guess I would say I'm I would be interested in it being an opportunity for civil discourse that the students could engage in with the administrators at the high school and navigating and identifying solutions together in partnership. I know this isn't a deliberation, but I'm just this is my chance, so I'm gonna say my um um in partnership together. But I also think like Phoebe said, this is a this is really unique because there's a behavioral component to this, right? And if we were looking at any other and it's different because you can remove the thing that's like driving the behavior.

But if we were looking at any other behavior in the classroom or in school that was negatively impacting instruction, we would be like, okay, what support does the kid need to change this behavior? How are we going to support them? What are we going to do?

What resources do they need? And I'm so concerned about kids not having that education component and that piece because and I'm making assumption I guess Phoebe that the divide is between some kids like you said some kids are able to manage it and some kids really aren't able to and that that is driven by underlying issues like whatever's happening at home or maybe um how their brain works or you know how all of us interact with technology differently like I don't know what's driving that and that difference between these some kids who don't have no problem with it and some um who do. And to me that's getting under to the bottom of that is just so it's part of our duty as as looking after our kids and making sure they're properly educated. We're doing so much social emotional support and helping them grow in these important ways to be in society that I think we're like in a transition period where this is not yet part of that and it's going to be one day once we learn how to navigate it. But it right now it feels and I totally as a parent it feels so hard. It really does. Um and I look forward to I hope when it when it maybe doesn't feels hard.

That's such a good point Mora. Thank you. Because when I was I think every time I heard about, well, for the kids who can't manage it, they're going to the bathroom and they're in there for like 15 minutes or, you know, they just they're they're so highly addicted to their phone. Those are the kids that I'm really concerned and I feel like are the most vulnerable children. So, whatever we do, it feels like um education around technology needs to be introduced. Um, but yeah, I I hear you and I think that thank you for bringing that up.

I I was going to say that I appreciate the comments. I I want to navigate my role in this carefully. I have fairly strong views on on on this topic. Um, with that said, I'll certainly support whatever the board wants to do, but I appreciate the fact that in this conversation several times, several parties have mentioned the addictive nature of what's happening with phones. And these are devices that are truly wired to interact with our brains and produce certain chemistry.

And when I consider how we educate kids about the dangers of addictive substances, we prevent them from having access to the substances and educate or we restrict the access.

There are varying levels of that restriction that happen in homes and we see the impact of that in schools and I hear that vein of the conversation tonight too that there are varying levels of restriction of access and modeling of behaviors in homes um that impact the way kids bring or or interact with cell phones in schools.

I just think that's an important I'm glad that that is coming out in the conversation. Uh it's an important angle to look at it. We educate and part of the way we often support kids is that we as adults make decisions that they're not yet equipped to make.

Okay. So, um the one of the questions we received prior to the board meeting was, you know, is there is there um an action step tonight? Um and when we set up these two uh spots on the agendas for tonight and um just under a month from now, the first meeting in November, uh the the idea was that tonight was sort of the um the listening session. We wanted more feedback from staff. So, thank you to all the folks from the high school, the middle school, and Durham. Um we wanted to hear from the students.

So, thank you, Phoebe, for that. Uh we we it was great to hear from public comment. Um so I I think the the plan uh that we had set up was the November date would be there will be a spot on that where the board actually deliberates on what steps do we want to take. Um and based on that the policy committee will then begin to craft a policy. Um just from a timing perspective you know policies take a fair amount of time to craft when there isn't one. And there's also a two-reed proc two read process to get it approved. Um, but that does not in any way limit our ability to take additional steps in the meantime if we wanted to, right? We don't currently have a policy that says every kid can have a phone and then if we said no, you can't have a phone, we would be defying our own policy. There isn't one. They're at the school level. The schools could make changes if if that were sort of the will of the group. Um so I just I just kind of want to separate obviously we have to have a policy that is the law. Um at some point before July um and I feel like this board wants to make progress on you know where where are we coming down on this in schools. Um they will be parallel but they don't have to be in lock step with each other just from a procedural standpoint. So I want folks to know that. Um and uh so so I I guess I would say um you know I didn't hear from from board members the desire to go back and really do a full survey again of staff. Um and correct me if I'm wrong. Um, you know, I I think I think as we move forward, we're going to want to, you know, pull in folks to to get some feedback, but I don't think we need a full survey between now and November 8th or 5th or whatever it is. I think it's 5th. Um, so I guess my question for board members is, um, do you know of information that you would want to have prior to that meeting to feel equipped? Um, or do you feel like once you've processed all of the information, thank you for all the information, um, you'll be ready to come to that conversation. care.

I think I would like to still hear from other districts on implementation, how they are implementing, how it's going, and also to hear from the students on how on their impact because the news articles we've read, it sounds we're hearing from the administrators saying it's going well. U so I would be curious to hear from the the students perspective. Y that's a good one. Yeah.

Yeah. And I think and again I'm I'm I'm aware that the the period of time in which most of the uh our neighbor districts have been doing this is uh very small but I think like anything that they've observed on specifically kind of um academic improvement sort of social impact and then like mental health um I think that would be really helpful to just have um anything that they're gathering on that. Um I think the other thing that I would be curious um again I don't think it would it would it would um influence my decision or how I would how I would argue for it at the next meeting but I think I think having a sense um uh going up to the the larger scale knowing that we're entering we're entering a very challenging budget um season um I think having perhaps a sense of um how much interest in the um or enthusiasm um or leadership there might be in the community um for fundraising around um this not necessarily just for the yonder bags um but for perhaps some of the educational um initiatives um because I think we've seen some wonderful you know the um uh the uh initiative that was driven by the community to create the to redo the um middle school um uh basketball courts. I can't remember how much money that was, but it was like it was at least $100,000.

Yeah, it was it was close to 125. Yeah.

And so I think that um so I think that just sort of that and um and uh no shade on on the importance of playing basketball. Um but like $125,000 for to have some basketball courts and then $125,000 or some some amount of money um that was uh um contributed or fundraised for by the community uh to support this kind of initiative. I don't know. I think that could that would also just be a really um that might just be a helpful thing to kind of have a sense a little bit of a sense of not to say like a promisory note or anything but just sort of a sense of like is that something that's interesting or if it's or if the community sort of like we would love you all to do this uh but go fund it and also don't raise our taxes.

Yes. Okay. I'm just looking at my clock here.

9:43 we are before 10. Um yes, we do have another public comment period. We will get there. Uh we just have to do one quick vote um on a committee and then we will have a a another opportunity for public comment.

Um so I'm just going to wrap up the discussion on cell phones. Everyone feel okay with that? Okay. So, uh, the other thing that we added as, um, as an adjustment to the agenda is, um, a a motion to, um, to replace Danielle on the policy committee. Um, I will throw it out there. I know Chris is interested in it. I don't know if others are interested in uh, joining the policy committee. I think Thursdays, is it Thursdays? 4:45 to 4:15 to 5:45 uh via Zoom.

I think you might be the only one. Okay.

So, do I have a motion to appoint uh Chris to the policy committee um for the remainder of this year? Okay. Anna and Mara, any questions? All those in favor?

Great. None opposed. Welcome to the committee and thank you for your work on it, Danielle.

Um, okay. So, we have no new business.

We have no personnel. So, now we're at public comment and everybody just left. So, I guess that tells us how long we went.

Um, so who said we weren't going to fill 90 minutes? Come on now. Oh, she did. She did. Um, all right. So, I would take a motion to adjurnn. All right, Mora and Cara. All those in favor?

All right. Thank you, guys.

============================================================

RSU5 BOARD OF DIRECTORS MEETING TRANSCRIPT
Meeting Date: October 22, 2025
Source File: transcript_2025-10-22_rBdsP2quvQA.txt
District: Regional School Unit 5 (Freeport, Durham, Pownal, Maine)
============================================================

Good evening. Welcome to the RSC 5 board director's meeting. Today is Wednesday, October 22nd, 2025 and we are in the elementary school cafeteria.

Uh we have almost everyone on the board tonight with the exception of Michelle.

I'll be for her this evening. She's unable to join us and join us.

So get started to the flag of the United States of America and to the stands nationy andice for all.

Motion for consideration approval of the minutes of the October 8, 2025 meeting as presented by any.

Thank you.

All those in favor adjustments to the agenda.

and good news and recognition from Moon, the board student representative.

Um hello everyone. Um to start off I guess um tomorrow we have the PSATs for all juniors. So that's a big thing that's going to happen tomorrow. Um another thing was that last week students um created pumpkins um and sent them over to Loban for the pumpkin fest and that was for in support of camp sunshine. So that was really fun to do and everyone was having really fun doing that. And then for the past couple of weeks, um, Freeport High School has been taking a stand against bullying, so we all wore orange and we've also been making posters to support those who are being bullied.

So um there's going on November 2nd there will be a Freeport ski swap from um 9:00 a.m. to 1 p.m. So that'll be a huge fundraiser for the Alpine and Nordics team. So I definitely recommend it. Um and then for um region 10 is also going to be hosting a multilingual open house on November 5th. So if anyone's interested in that, definitely please go. And then um Freeport is also going to be doing an annual makers fair on November 21st just for I guess for students to see all the arts and crafts and um anything really cool that they want to buy. And then lastly um me and Maria um Abarco are going to be the new school board reps.

Wonderful. We'll we'll look forward to uh welcoming our new rep. Um and thank you so much, Moon. I do have a question.

Is the Makers Fair open to the public or is it just for students? Um I don't believe so. Sounds fun. Sorry to miss out on that.

Okay, great. Um all right, public comment.

I don't see anyone that might want to make a public comment, but there is an another opportunity at the end. Uh reports from the superintendent.

Well, good evening everybody. Uh hope everybody's been enjoying fall here in Maine and finally some rain which is really nice for all of us and much needed. Um I'd like to start tonight again for thanking you for your support.

It has been evident as we've navigated some challenging situations the past week and it's it's greatly appreciated.

I want to talk tonight about the budget process and give you an update on some of the steps that I've been taking. Um, as you know, one of the initiatives that I brought about this year is to try to very purposefully and meaningfully incorporate the staff perspective. So, we've had listening sessions that have taken place in each of the schools that were voluntary. Those were very well attended and I not only gave me a chance to hear directly from staff, but it gave sta the cha staff a chance to hear directly from me. Um and then I have followed those up just last week with an individual staff survey um for those folks who couldn't attend the meetings but who also might have wanted a different format to which through which to express their views. For both the listening sessions and the survey, I focused on the same four questions. And the questions are what's working well that we need to maintain, what challenges do we face, where are our opportunities for growth, and where could we find efficiencies? And I kept the questions really broad and got a really good range of feedback that way.

Um, when all that feedback comes in, my intention is to make the results publicly available to the staff and the board. And I'll probably also unapologetically use AI to do a redux of that feedback so that the themes emerge.

And my hope is that using AI will actually keep my voice and my bias out of it so that it is true to what the staff actually thinks.

Um, I am really seeing those opportunities as very thoughtful conversations. I don't know where it leads. I don't know how it ends up informing the final budget, but I always believe that in situations like this, the process is the product and it's how we become a community. So, however that perspective ends up informing the budget that I proposed to the board and the way that the board accepts or modifies that budget, I hope it will be meaningful and transparent.

Um, strategic planning. So, the strategic planning work continues with great schools partnership. We have been focusing on the part called the vision of a learner which is the backwards planning point from which the actual strategic plan is made. Um and that basically means the skills and qualities that a person who graduates from our system would have. Um there have been public listening sessions, there have been surveys from multiple stakeholders across the district and at this point we're about ready to turn that into something concrete, an actual plan. So that's the next big step and we'll be launching into that over the next few months.

Um the early childhood transition task force. So my hope at the last meeting was to really lay out the challenge that we face with the responsibility of assuming um special education services for three to 5 year olds. Um I did put out a letter to the community and the staff asking for stakeholders to be part of an early childhood transition task force and those um folks have volunteered and just yesterday I sent out an email for all the folks who were chosen. I'm really grateful that we have a wide range of people to be part of that task force. Um the first meeting is set for next week uh Wednesday, October 29th. It will be at more street school and although I haven't developed the agenda for that meeting yet, um my intention for this task force is for it really to be a place where organically a number of stakeholders look at the challenge and then survey the landscape which means here's what we're charged to do. Here are the strengths that we have.

here are the needs that we have and then hopefully to present to the board multiple options to get there. Um that is the hope that by January this task force can accomplish. So at the first meeting um even though I haven't done the agenda I can tell you roughly we will look at the state mandate and really wrap our minds around that because that in itself is a lot to understand. We'll take an inventory of the resources that we currently have to the best of our ability. that includes not just resources in the school system but in the community with local child care providers and then we'll try to start identifying priorities for the next steps and I'm confident that you know again I don't know what that can that group will come up with but it will be a menu of options that is informed by multiple points of view which I always consider valuable. Um the last topic I wanted to talk about tonight is school safety. And um we all know that within the past week we have had some very interesting and unfortunate situations come up in the realm of school safety. Um I just want the board to know that in situations like that we safety truly is our highest priority. We consult with law enforcement. We take their advice. I really want to give a a tremendous vote of confidence and thanks to Pam Crosby who really has navigated a very very intricate challenging situation that has required delicacy and sensitivity. And our intention is to keep everyone safe not only physically but emotionally and that means treating the people folks who are directly involved with dignity. Um, so please just know that those are our priorities and we are very very diligent about them and I want to thank you for your ongoing guidance and support and I very much appreciate the way that this board engages with complex issues.

Thank you Tom. Appreciate all of those efforts and the updates. Anyone have questions for Tom on any of that? Okay, resignations.

Yes, we have a resignation. Gloria Sulttz who is the Mor Street School kitchen manager.

Support staff hires.

We have two. Meredith Brent has been hired as an edtech at More Street School and Jenny Bakewell has been hired as an edtech at More Street School.

Wonderful. Administrator reports. Uh finance with Kelly Wentworth.

Good evening. Included in your packet um tonight were the expenditures through September 30, 2025.

Um I do not uh see any issues with um where we're at right now in in the funding process um as you know, we've we've had a few challenges. One one you will consider tonight um with the movement of the capital projects funding money that we typically have available within the facilities article. um we had shifted that out to reserve this year.

Um and we shifted the life safety items into um the budget in its place and so that presents a little bit of a challenge because we have to come to you um when we need uh to expend out of reserve. So, um we will have an article a little later on um for consideration for the board to spend out of reserves for the um Durm Community School automation building automation system um which software is failing and uh is no longer supported by the manufacturer.

So, um we are going to uh propose to accelerate the project um to get it done now um versus um leaving it in phase two of the energy audit which is where it was actually living. Um the other thing I wanted to report is um I have spent three glorious days so far this week um with the auditor um in the office. Um we are reviewing the FY25 financials. Um I'm glad to report right now we don't we have not come across any issues. Um but that will continue um at least through the end of the week and probably some of next week as well. And then um they'll go back to their um office and complete the audit. Um, and we're hoping to have it done on time. Um, but we'll see how that works out. Sounds great. Thank you, Kelly. Questions for Kelly?

Okay. Oh, sorry. Cara, can you remind us how often these audits happen and are they random or is this an annual?

No. So, we are required by statute to actually have an annual audit and we actually um have to have it submitted to the Department of Education annually.

Um, typically the deadline is December 31st. Um, but if anybody has been out in the finance world, we know that the um, auditor pool is shrinking. Um, and therefore, um, I would be surprised if anyone has gotten their audit in on time in the last couple of years. Um, not to do with the fact of the school itself.

Um, but just for the lack of availability of staffing at the auditing firms.

So, it's taking longer. Thank you, Kelly.

Update from Panel Elementary School and go review with Holly Johnson.

Good evening. Um, it's great to be here.

Um, and it's raining, so it's nice not to be home on an evening where there's fun things outside. It's wet. So, um I um I know you both got um the re review of the goals from last year and um the new goals for this school year. Um I'm going to start by celebrating um that the school year has started really strong. Um and of course the playground equipment has been um an excitement. Uh uh it took a couple weeks, but um now students are kind of used to the equipment. You would think it would been there for a long time and they know which pieces they like. It's not like everyone wants to be on one piece. Um, we did spend time um the first couple days reviewing the equipment so everybody knew how to use them because there were certainly some new pieces that the children um had not experienced. Um and the three new pieces um were added um you know just before the start of school. It went um seamlessly and then um the new swings were ordered um and they're due to arrive in the next couple weeks. So um there'll be some more things for the students to um enjoy. So, um, thank you again for the board's support of that.

And, um, you know, I've been talking a bit about the science that we've been adding, um, not only at Powell, but in different, um, classrooms across the district for grades three through five.

Um, it's a an exciting time. The teachers are enjoying the teaching and the students are enjoying the learning.

Um, I want to thank Chris. um he was able to um come visit a couple weeks ago and I'm going to have an open invitation for others that would like to come and um see some of it in action. And I've got a little apology um signing up for the opportunities for the board was a little shaky. We um uh Jen Winkler wanted to host in fifth grade, but some of the major things she needed for the science um experiment actually just arrived Friday. So um she is now continuing with her unit work. Um and again if anyone would like to come and see some of the other grades or other units um you can reach out and um it's just exciting to see the kids excited about um the type of learning um that is going on during that science work. Um and then reflections from last year's goals. Um as I shared in um the document um I think we were able to complete everything as far as some of the different action items that um we had laid out um for the first goal on chronic absenteeism.

Uh our uh we went from 4.94 in 2324 to down to 1.9%.

Um, I did a lot of communication with families, um, and shared the message that it's important to be at school. Um, got some great feedback from families that realized, oh, they really do need to be here, so we'll make a different arrangement for an appointment or not take as long of a trip. So, it really um it made an impact on students showing up on a regular basis. Um, and that's that's great. We're going to continue this year um, and continue messaging.

and I haven't sent out anything yet and I will be shortly. Um and the other aspect of that is not only attending every day but every full day. Um the impact of arriving tardy or being dismissed early also makes an impact on learning. Um so I'll be sharing some information about that as well. Um, one of the action steps for the um, attendance was um, teachers reached out more than they had in the past as the student was absent to families to do that first touch base. We always do this um, the the safety calls from the main office, but um, teachers were reaching out with like a um, how you doing? We missed you. Um, we want to see you um, let me know what we can do to help. So that that also impacted which was um a great um addin. Um the care team continues to meet this year um on a every week to talk about students um not only health but the attendance um and that was another positive impact um on attendance.

Um another part to um students uh thriving in school was our work with social emotional learning. Um we continue to be strong with responsive classroom. Last year we um really emphasized CARES which are the is kind of the SEAL um uh parts to um responsive classroom. students now know those terms. Um we can use them um freely um across the school day, the adults with the students and they understand what we're talking about and we can make it um like a real we can say you showed um cooperation by even in pre-k that vocabulary is there which is wonderful. And um uh we also introduced some um aspects of regulated classroom with teachers and we're continuing with that this year in the area of goal two for um accelerated overall academic growth. Um you'll see that um achievement it um for K2 as measured by the benchmark assessment um showed a little bit of shift um pretty much similar to the year before. Um I'm keep emphasizing that um for the past this will be year now three that we've really emphasized the foundational skills in K1 and two and it continues to show in our data that it's making a shift both in literacy and math and then our main throughear assessments um continue to be strong as well. uh teachers worked hard in PLC work last year looking um closely at data but also looking at practices to support um students at um whether it's in tier one or um tier 2 and really looking at um ways to focus on those foundational skills. K2 focused a lot last year on math. They're continuing to focus on math this year. and uh three, four and five are working last year a lot on writing and this year they're shifting to some reading work in their PLC's questions.

Okay. Um so last year's goals really did build a foundation for um this year. Um many of the um I didn't really make a big shift in the goals. Um just some of the action steps are slightly different.

Um one of the um additional things that we're going to be doing this year is um focusing on um more parent involvement. Um an example of that um is educating families about um our house. um we're putting an emphasis on them this year um and kind of integrating them slightly with CARES.

Um so during our first um parent teacher conferences which were actually last week um that was the basis of their conferences um and we had students reflect and report out to families about where they were in their house. teachers were able to show um some examples of that and students were actually setting goals um on what they want to work on um because the trimester doesn't end till December. So that's an example of really educating families exactly what we're talking about, what it looks like. Um and so when they get that report card, it doesn't spell out exactly what does preparedness mean um at fifth grade, third grade, kindergarten, but um we have documentation that we've been sharing and using with families and students um around that and it's um already showing a good um shift. Um, another example of that is, um, we have always done, um, since I've been here and we were a title one school, we did, um, a family breakfast where we brought families in and, um, students were able to share some of their work and we would talk about what we're doing um, for services in reading and math. This year, we want to expand that to all families. So, um, later in November, we're going to have a family literacy breakfast. Um it will take place during the regular breakfast time.

The gym will be set up very different than it typically is for breakfast. Um we'll serve light refreshments, breakfast for families, and students can interact with students and we'll have some stations out where um there'll be some adults leading those but also teach uh students will be showing this is what I'm doing when I'm uh decoding a word or this is how I use this tool. This is what it looks like when I'm reading in my book. Um talking about comprehension.

Um so different just sharing with families what we're doing um within the school day to support literacy and then ways they can help at home.

And the science work continues. Um I know uh we'll continue with the two units that we've already been implementing in three four and five. Um and Jen Winkler is going to add a third open sed unit this year um because she just loves the work and she sees the impact it's doing on student learning.

So, any questions? Yes.

Sorry, Kelly.

Yes. I was looking at your number sense screener for 25 and the three through five was um 40% meeting the end of year benchmark. I was wondering if you could just expand a little bit about some of the reasons you think that might have happened and what you're doing to address it.

Yeah. Um it's a fairly new assessment for not only the school but the district. So we're learning about it. Um the it's implemented in the fall, the winter, and the spring. The winter and the spring the students do um some written responses. In the fall it's just a interview. So there isn't a written component. So it usually looks very different in the fall to the winter and then to the winter to the spring. Um some of what we're seeing um and we've really looked closely at K2 around it.

Um that the way that students are presented with um how they're asked to show some of their thinking is very different than what they see in the classroom. So we're helping um we're working with teachers to support students to like make that connection to what's being presented and how they need to show their thinking and work. Um so we're doing more of that. Um I just met with K2 teachers for our PLC this week and we brought in some student work that we had given them um around some story problems and we're analyzing them. Um and then going to be able to support um students in knowing what's the expectation when I need to show my response, show my thinking. Um and we'll bring bringing the same kind of work into three, four, and five because we've seen that the written response part of it. So in the the winter and the fall in the spring both have an uh interview, but then they have the written part. And we're just want to make sure that students know what's being asked of them and can perform that. um on the NWA they're not asked to really show their show their work. So they need to show their answer. So many times the students can actually get an answer but if they're not showing their work um then it they don't get full credit. So it's a it's a really um so we want to make sure that they understand what the expectation is and support them in doing that on a regular basis.

Other questions for Holly?

Thank you so much, Holly. It was great to hear about the um the goals for um for next year. Thank you.

Yeah. And the achievement on um absenteeism. That's that's great.

Update from Freeport Middle School and goal review with Pam Crosby.

All right, I just got to set something up here really quick. Just bear with me.

Andrew, thank you for the lesson earlier on this.

And I think I have to push this button.

That's all right.

So, wow. Here we are. Um, I just I want to thank you again um for the opportunity to share our goals. I know and I stood before you folks this summer. I thank you for the opportunity.

Um it was a little bit of an interesting board meeting, but I really want to stand here today and really really thank you. Um I felt a heart full of help and pride. I have found a new home aside from my home. I've met great children.

I've met great family. I have a great team. And I'm just really really loving my on boarding school. So, this thank you is like really from the bottom of my heart and I just want to give a shout out to the staff. Um, it's it's been really really great. So, uh, I've had an opportunity for my daughters to come visit school and they're like, "Mom, this is this is great." So, I think that's really important.

So, goal reflections. I'm going to get to this in a second, but I'm going to just kind of snapshot last year. It's a little tricky for me because I wasn't there last year, but I've got some data to show. Um, and I know you guys have that in front of you. So last year the goal for attendance was 14% to get under 14% and that was based on the 23 24 baseline data which was 17.92. So that's kind of high. There was improvement when I reflected back last year um on the 2425 to 16.27.

I'm going to aim even bigger which I'm going to talk about in a second and we are going we are we are full force into it. So, I've spent some time talking and connecting with uh teams, team members, and the support that was implemented last year. We've reflected on things that were in place last year, areas of improvement, and we are hitting the ground running and completely actively engaged. Um, and I'm going to talk about that a little bit when we get to this year's goals. The second goal last year was challenging students with clearly defined, rigorous expectations to support enriched experiences for all.

So, again, learning curve for me. So, and meeting with grade levels and leadership team and all of that good stuff. It sounds like last year, I'll keep hitting that.

There were some vertical meetings and a lot of consultation work with logos across the content areas, which we're going to continue that work with logos this year, but we're going to craft that a little bit differently. Um, but as we begin to j as we continue this journey into the school year, I've been doing a lot of listening. I've been doing a lot of observing and most of all connecting.

Uh so through this I'd like to take the opportunity and really kind of move from last year and really focus on this year.

Um and kind of tell you guys where we're going with this. Um I had a great visit with the board the other day. I hope that you could see that I'm really genuine and true about climate and culture. School should be a place that students want to come. Um it shouldn't be I got to go to school. They should want to have a hook. They want to be engaged. They want to be there. Same thing for the team. We want it to be a happy, welcoming place. So that's super super important for me and I feel like Freeport has that and we're going to continue to foster that and we're going to continue to bring fresh ideas that I can bring to continue that climate and culture, student engagement and get kids just truly excited and hooked into uh their education while they're with us from grades 6 through 8. So here's the thing. I know this is kind of small. I apologize for this. One of the things we're doing is we're shifting conferences. We're going to give it a whirl to studentled conferences this year um in November. So, what I've done is I've actually kind of modeled for you what it's going to look like for students when they kind of talk through um their portfolios when parents come in. It's really going to be student centered. It's supposed to be really positive experience looking at goals and showing artifacts across their content areas. So, we have and that should say it does say 12%. Okay. Phew. Um we're going to reduce chronic absenteeism by 12%.

Mr. Greg, I'll help you with this. We're aiming high for this, but we we want kids at school, right? We understand their circumstances. There's medical situations, there's family circumstances, there's personal circumstances, but we want to just make sure that kids when they can, they want to get to school. Our second goal is going to create a schoolwide focus on setting clear expectations that challenge every student and support their success.

So, when students are doing their parentled conferences, their tabs up above with the cursors will say math, science, ELA. I've just kind of generated it to go over the goals. So, our first goal is we're going to talk about attendance and I apologize it's really small but it reflects the the paper I gave you folks. So, the difference between chronic absenteeism and truent absenteeism I just wanted to be clear is chronic is excused and unexcused and truent is those unexcused kiddos. So, some things that we've done um this year reflecting on last year is proactive communication with families.

We have a super big team approach our SAT team it's trickling into advisories.

it's trickling into um other support staff and really making the kids feel like we want you here. Hey, it's really great to see you today. Um keep up the good work.

Connections through advisories and that's a piece of the student led conferences. Those are going to be hosted through advisories. Communication from all staff. Um that's an email, phone calls, letters. Those could just be positive shoutouts. That could be a student being out, hey, we really miss miss you in class. Looking forward to seeing you. Right here, I've done an example of a return to school form. I'm going to talk about that in a second, but that kind of represents how students are going to place an artifact of their work into the portfolio. So, any student that is absent for three consecutive days or more, we have a support staff and we're going to help the kids with this form. Hey, how can we acclimate you back to school? That's going to be easier for some kids, a little bit more challenging for others. So, just a way for them, I missed stuff so they're not overwhelmed and how can we support their return?

more student celebrations. I think it's important not just to recognize student academic success. I think it's important to acknowledge when a kid does a club um when a kind deed. So more of those celebrations kind of I got you being good. I think that's a super important piece of celebrating kids. Our goals to support attendance is to continue to strengthen the climate and culture at FMS offering a well-rounded student approach. So certainly right the academics are important but that social emot emotional piece and keeping them engaged.

So student centered learning. So this is kind of our second goal here. Schoolwide focus on clear expectations that challenge every student to support their success. So certainly we have students of a wide range of academic abilities.

We want to challenge the kids that are here. We want to challenge the kids that are here. We want to challenge the kids that really kind of need those extra supports. So, what have we done? We've had department meetings. We've had leadership team meetings, grade level meetings, MTSS time in collaboration with our instructional strategist, which I want to give her a shout out. She has been excellent creating data walls. So, we're able to really zone in on kids and how do we help them again get from here, the middle here, and from the lower end here. So, that's super important. We're continuing to collect feedback, reflecting, making revisions. This is done through surveys, shared ongoing notes, data walls to support student growth, and we're looking at creating some interdicciplinary stu um opportunities for students to showcase.

So, here it shows um some of our academic achievement. It reflects last year and it reflects this year. And as you can see, Freeport Middle School is really knocking it out of the park. You look at the data from last year and you compare the data from this year, math and reading, we're over the 50th percentile. We're we're in the 70th. I share this because this data is super important. If you look at the green and blue, we can't just, oh, these guys are doing great. Oh, they're doing great, but how can we get them from great to continue that growth? And the same thing goes from the kids in the yellow, the orange, and the red. So, it's looking at the whole student, the kids that really need that challenge, the kids that really need that support. And I think that's really an important lens to keep on student engagement. Uh we are I I'll tell you and I know the board saw this the other day. I am so pleased walking in the hallways of Freeport Middle School and seeing the teachers not sitting behind their desks. They are actively engaged with these kids which is awesome. I walk the halls multiple times a day. them in the classroom and the teachers are providing experiences for kids and I think that's really really important. Um I've highlighted some kids here in science classes. I've highlighted a picture here. Our eighth graders did a pretty cool adventure with the kids last year uh last week because the Acadia trip unfortunately got got cancelled. And we're just looking at more and more opportunities to get the kids outside of school and making that learning real and making that learning relevant.

I apologize board. I could not help myself but add this. Um, so teamwork, right? It's not just about the student. Well, of course it's about the student.

It's a team. It's your it's your students. It's your staff. It's your families. It's your community. It's a super important teamwork opportunity uh to communicate and to provide these opportunities for our kids to succeed.

Me being new to Freeport, um I have quite a background in education. and I I've done it for a long time. I am so passionate about that climate and culture. Like I said, I I want the kids when they come in the morning to be excited to be here. I'm actually reading um a book that the seventh graders are interested in during BCS. And in the book, it talks about how middle school kids um it's called House Rest. Think about school as just a mountain they got to get through. We don't want it to be an a place where I just got to get through it. We want them to come. We want them to explore. We want to adventure. and we want them to have memorable experiences.

That's what I I'm I'm hoping and very passionate to bring to Freeport. I've learned um that I have a great team of teachers to work with and like I mentioned, the kids are just they bring me so much joy. They're so pleasant, they're so happy, they're so kind and I'm just really looking forward to this school year and creating a foundation where um I've become part of them.

questions for me. Thank you, Pam. Um, I have a question. I'm not familiar with the acronym Logos.

What could you just It's our literacy consultant. Um, yeah.

So, I've actually uh worked with her in other districts as well. Um, really a wealth of knowledge in the Lucy Caukins curriculum. I know that name's changed a lot. Last year, she came in and she worked with uh a bunch of different content areas on how, for example, in science. So, science, a lot of hands-on, um, but they do reading and how to make that come alive and become real. So, she's come in once, uh, this year. She's coming in November 4th again, and we're really utilizing her skill set to give us some resources and continue consultation work with her.

Great. Thank you, Anna.

Thank you, Pam. Um, it was really fun to be at the middle school the other day and I I definitely got the sense of the joyful learning that was happening. Um, I was wondering, we talked so much last year about budget cuts at the middle school level and um, could you walk us through I believe we kept a full-time science teacher and a 0.5 position and a 0.25 25 position. And I was just wondering if that I don't know if you know since you came this year, but like if those staff positions stayed the same or did you change them for the needs or what happened with that?

Sure. So, I've heard a lot about last year. Um, and uh we did fill that science position. Um, we have an awesome uh seasoned teacher doing a great job.

Uh, we did fill the 0.5 position. I still have a 0.25 position out there right now. So, Other excuse me uh other questions for Pam.

I do want to just pass out these awesome pamphlets we made just kind of highlighting some things the kids did this year. Everyone has media permission.

Thank you so much Pam for all the updates. Sounds like there's some fantastic stuff ahead.

U multilingual learners update with Erica Mateo.

Good evening everyone. Erica Mato, assistant superintendent.

Um I have some of my colleagues. Well, I I suppose yes, you'll be here for a bit.

Yeah, I have um some of my colleagues here with me who are able to answer uh questions as we get into um the Q&A part of the presentation. So, I had shared with you that I would love to offer an update. I don't have a slide deck for this part. We'll talk about we'll go through some slides with the multilingual um sorry with the Lao plan presentation later um in the meeting. Um so offering some updates on our work for multilingual learners in this district.

Um we I I was um introduced to a team a lovely team of multilingual staff here in RSU5 by Superintendent Scarappa last spring. So we have been working throughout the summer and into the leadup to this year um to get ready um to sort of relaunch our work. Um Lynn uh Shea cannot be with us tonight, but Lana O'Shea is still here. She needs to leave to attend to a child in a little bit.

And then we've got Jill Highland as well. Um I know you know familiar faces faces and they can introduce themselves and their their specific work when they um when they do come up either now or in the um in the Lao portion. Um so again, we've been meeting since June. Uh we lifted a lot of work over the summer to uh restart the year in a way that attended to all of our hopes and dreams for both meeting the um the expectations for multilingual learners through state guidance and what we knew we could do with the staff and the resources that we had. We had some leftover grant money from a multilingual grant to um supply some materials as well. So our team has regular meetings, maybe more regular than they would like, but they meet with me a lot. We meet together. Um so that has been um I think a really nice shift.

Um we worked together to craft the Lao plan, which we'll talk about later. So um we've been involved um in that work and it was definitely initiated um last year in terms of knowing we needed to lean into that. Um we have furthered our clarity as to what are actually our service requirements per the main DOE guidance. So the DOE has offered us guidance on what does it look like to serve students at different levels of need. Um so we have clarity uh more clarity in that work. Um clarity with regard to the home language survey that we use when we do registration. So um what does some of the answers indicate and what do we need to do in response? We have a lot of clarity around that. Um we were already doing that work but um some fine-tuning. Um we have um we've initiated uh some new translation and interpretation services um for multiple purposes. So universally now we have available across the district an app called reach my teach which is used in many main districts and has gone kind of national. Um it's fabulous. I I'll leave it to others to share maybe how they feel about it from a user interface, but it is intended to be very um intuitive and um the contents of the email or it can come through as a text message if the parent has opted for the preference of text um are all translated including attachments which is fantastic. So those general attachments that we're sending out um just you know this is what we're doing in class or um some of the um everyday kinds of things are addressed through reach my teach. We can also utilize reach my teach. We've added an extension for um an an extension piece of reach my teach called lexicet that calls in a live interpreter in minutes notice. um it'll take a maximum of I would say 10 minutes to get somebody on the line for live interpretation.

So if a parent is in our sort of ecosystem of they're in powers school, they're in the student information system, then they're automatically in reach my teach. So we're able to support our families really really um fluidly through that resource. It also means that if like a a LCSSW, a social worker in the school or a school counselor or a principal or you know a secretary at the front desk, they're also able to engage those resources with just a couple of clicks, which is really great, I think.

um for um resources that are being shared with parents or documents that are being shared with parents that may be legally binding such as like a field trip permission slip or IEP documentation. We have a different layer of um of certified translation and we're using an application called Moword which is used by government entities as well.

Um so we've just started using that one.

Uh we'll be using that for printed report cards as well um which we still do at the elementary schools. And we've also incorporated a resource called language line which is which is live interpretation services again but for people who might exist not yet in our student information system. So, if a parent approaches for registration or if a member of the public approaches with a question or a parent appears that isn't in P school yet for some reason, being able to communicate with folks, including our own staff members, um we may utilize this resource language line.

So, all of our first points of contact have these index cards that show how to navigate that. And again, an interpreter will be on the line in minutes. So if we have somebody buzz trying to buzz into the building and explain why they're there, for example, we can engage um an interpreter. Um the team also uh so Lynn, Lana, and Shay also participated uh took took a lot of their own time to participate in a sort of nationally certified training called SCOP training.

Um, SCUP is an acronym that kind of lost its full lang full like word explanation, but it actually stands for um sheltered instruction observation protocol, which doesn't explain much. Um but it it is intended um to for to support general education teachers in the delivery of general education content considering language acquisition needs of students in the general education setting. So to um to leverage language access strategies to ensure that the student has the opportunity to to demonstrate their mastery in the regular education setting. It's also utilized in the multilingual setting but um critical in in the general education setting. Um and lastly, we have um we've purchased a resource uh from National Geographic that offers a continuum of printed resources and consumable resources. So those are now offered onetoone for all of our identified multilingual learners and they are um assigned to learners at a at their developmental stage and as learners move along the continuum the progression of language mastery then they are offered um the next step in that resource. So, um there are really two primary options on the market for this type of resource and um this is the one that people tend to like better. So, um we're very lucky to have learned from the experience of others and be able to put a really high quality researchbased peer-reviewed resource in front of our multilingual learners for their um specific targeted multilingual language acquisition time with their teachers. So, a little bit has happened since June. Um, and uh, the team I I think it's fair to say we're quite proud of our work and um, I think all of us would be happy to answer any questions that you have and we'll speak to the allow specifically later in the meeting. Any questions for Erica or the team?

Valerie?

So my question is kind of related to our cell phone pending cell phone policy as well. Do we have any idea the support of our multilingual folks getting a hold of their children if they don't have a lot of English-based communication as adults? Do we have any support for that?

I'm just making sure that we're not creating a barrier with our policy.

So front office staff um have access to all of these resources and any child and family member who are rostered in reach my teach which is anybody who's rostered in power school they can all leverage the Lexa key resource or the the text or email based or both um option of text through reach my teach.

I'm Jill Highland. I'm the teacher at high school and I know that all of my parents have I have regular contact with all of my parents through reach my teach. It is an app that's also used so that they don't have I'm so loud um so that they don't um have to have any charges because it will go through WhatsApp and so that's a really good thing about reach my teach is that I've had a lot of success with it over the years because it does not incur any fees so it shouldn't be a barrier. Okay. Thank you. Yeah, Kelly.

Yeah, we had a lot of discussion in the budget last season about um the level of staffing to support our multilingual learners and I'm I'm curious to get an update about how you feel that's going this year. Do you feel like we have a good level of staffing for the amount of of MLL students that we have and how how do they how do they feel like they're supported?

So I can say we exceed the minimum service requirement. Um so the learners are um on a continuum of uh one to three sessions per English class equivalent.

Is that about right with our service structure? Our service, our structured hours is based on language level and proficiency.

And so you can always do with less. Are we overstaffed?

I would say no. We have five buildings that we service with three teachers. Um, we fought hard for this position last year and I would say that there is not a moment of my day, Lana's day or um, Lynn's day that is spent dillydallying you could say. Um, are we over the service?

Like that's we Yeah, we we exceed the minimum requirements.

So the the DOE gives us guidance as to, for example, if a child is a is a level three, they're going to need two service hours. It's hour equivalents per day roughly or one depending on their level.

And um we are meeting andor exceeding those requirements. Um there are other opportunities through this SCOP training to push that um that support for learners out into the rest of their day.

So um the multilingual team have been now trained to be in a position to offer even deeper support for staff to carry the English language acquisition plan into that general classroom setting. So they have additional time to to do that but um they are not un disengaged. Uh they're engaged all day long. Yeah.

Numbers wise we had 43 students last year with eight monitored and we have 43 students this year with 17 monitored. So all that says is that we are exiting out students which the students are meeting proficiency because of the services that we are giving them.

Great. So what I hear you saying is that we are above the minimum and we're utilizing that those extra hours profitably through this scion program or whatever it is that you said sop sheltered instruction observation protocol which doesn't really tell you much. Yeah.

Yes. Okay. Indeed. in the general ed. So the child's in their day the rest of the day and how much we can support the rest of their teachers in language acquisition strategies in that other setting is um is where the rubber meets the road.

Got it. Thank you for clarifying that. I think another piece of it too in addition to that is just that yes we we exceed the we exceed the minimum which is established by the state and in addition to these resources we have really good teachers and I mean I haven't been I mean by reputation I have not been in your classroom but I think that that deserves to be publicly said uh we have really I said last year the door is always open I'll get Yeah, we could see how much your students loved you. That was really great to see. Thank you. And they were not paid.

Yes. Yes.

And I think it came up last year that it would be wonderful if the board maybe had a scheduled visit. Um maybe that could be an opportunity if that's I don't know.

I bet that could be arranged perhaps. Not to put you on the spot, but if if board members are interested.

Other questions?

Well, thank you so much for all this information about these wonderful support. It sounds great and for all your hard work and efforts. Thank you. And thank you to the teaching team. Yeah. Thanks.

Yes. Thank you for being here.

Okay. Uh board comments and committee reports, board information exchange and agenda requests. So, this is an opportunity on the agenda if board members would like any information or to give any updates um on committees outside of our normal reports that we have.

Valerie, I have some updates from region 10. I attended on Monday. Um, two updates that are possibly related.

One is that they have some equipment failure that they identified and it is rather pricey. So, they are putting in for shared grants with the state. Um the total of the three that they are putting in for is roughly slightly under one million. And my understanding is the state if they approve it will take half of that cost and the other half would then be have to go to referendum. So, possibly up to around half a mill um shared among the three school districts that feed into region 10. And because of the need of one of the items, and I have it in my bag, um it's the the big ticket item is a dust collection device, which um for people who are in the trades, that's a humongous need. Collects all the dust out of the air. It's like a giant vacuum. Unfortunately, it costs $450,000.

Um, so that's one item. A second item is uh safety. They currently have to do um kind of like a glorified ring camera to get people into the building. They're looking for a bulletproof pass through and there's some other associated costs.

That's roughly 29,000.

And then I can't remember what the third thing is, but it was like 300,000.

So, three separate grants that are due by October 31 that they're submitting for. And if that is approved by the state or any one of them is approved by the state, it likely will have to go to referendum. But the dust collection unit is dying and they normally would put it through in June on the normal voting cycle for everything else to try to save having to do an additional vote. Uh but because of the dust collection and the need for it, they're looking at possibly doing a special election in February.

So hopefully more to come on that. And the other um mostly unrelated, partially related item was uh we had the meeting at May Maritime Academy on the Brunswick Air Force Base or former Air Force Base.

Um and we're hosted by them. We got to see the architectural drafting room that they rent at that facility. and Main Maritime and BIDW both presented um kind of a very loose proposal of trying to increase their partnership with region 10. Um they have apparently many job opportunities then there's no pipeline. Um what the board discussed was that any partnership would not be quota based but simply a partnership. Um so there's more to come on that. that Main Maritime Academy does have more space to rent and there's potentially some cost savings in the budget because they have a portable in use now at region 10 that if they stopped renting that they could potentially leverage that to rent more space in the main maritime building. Um, so there's those are still in early infancy talks, but certainly worth discussing here because another thing that came up was that they were not able to accept as many students as applied. So they really want to be able to increase their ability to take more students that are interested in the trades at region 10 as a whole or specifically for that interaction that program at mean? Oh, it's as a as a whole. As a whole.

Yeah. So, they're looking to move whatever they can out of the portables potentially into the main maritime space. Um, and I guess Main Maritime and BIW rent them that room, but they did all of on their own dime all of the retrofitting of that room and the monitors for CAD, which is computer rated drafting, and some other investments into the school that they didn't ask for reimbursement for. So, uh, the expectation is that it likely would be a similar situation where they have a large empty space right now that we looked at and potentially move the child care, anything that's easily moved into an office space. So, culinary arts would have to stay where it is. Um, any of the more hands-on trade things would have to remain. Um, we also discussed if they got rid of the portable, they still have the slab with all of the plumbing and electrical hookups and how they could potentially leverage that into a real um, workspace for the building group. They could try to work into a place that's already pre-staged with all of those things. Um, so those are all in the infancy, but for sure worth discussing here. Is there some thought that the cost savings from the potential portable could offset some of the other costs? There is. So, apparently the rental, which is up at the end of the fiscal year, is roughly 108,000 a year. So, okay.

Um the the amount that they pay for the single room currently, I believe he said 3,000 a month.

Gotcha. Okay. Kelly, were there any concerns expressed about the two different locations and how they would coordinate? Um, yeah, I did bring up transportation.

Yeah. So they did talk about how they might have to potentially um because current state is because it's one class they use uh vans they might have to potentially invest in buses or discuss with uh the town of Brunswick of a public transportation option to go from the primary campus across town to the other campus because it's all within Brunswick proper. Um, and additionally because it's region 10, many of those students have their own vehicles. So, it would be just driving to a different location. So, I mean, the transportation was discussed and he was um the superintendent did stay that it was for sure on his radar and he's looking at options.

And do we know um how many students from um RSU5 were unable to go to region 10?

Um, maybe that's something for the future we could find out about. Yeah, I don't know how many. Colin, yeah, Valerie, thank you so much for that update. That was awesome. I don't um know the actual number, but I do know that um the numbers have been increasing over the last couple of years um at um and so the uh region 10 folks are just super happy about all the interest, but it is raising questions about um what does it mean if we uh are not if region 10 is not able to um to admit everyone that is interested. Um um there is so I I think um they would be able to speak to this, Superintendent uh Shabbat would be able to speak to this more directly, but there's always a bit of a question of um uh more folks enroll than end up going.

Um, so there's a little bit of a question of how like what a weight list can look like and what it means if like if a certain percentage of students decide that they're not going to go. Um, is there any flexibility of having for example Freeport of the Freeport High School students who did not initially get in go, which I think currently that's not possible. Um, so I think there's some questions around that that need to be addressed that are regardless of space or regardless of location, excuse me. Kelly.

Yeah. I just I'm curious with this possibility of more space if they've talked about expanding program offerings. I know we had heard from them in in the last year about how they were thinking about that in the future and um I know that seemed like a long-term um project, but just sort of wondering where they're at with the timeline on that.

Yeah, no specific curricula were discussed, but um that was part of that was for sure part of the discussion with BW and MMA as well of because they kind of view it as a pipeline for better or worse. Um it was the needs that they have and and programs that they would like to see to kind of prepare students as an attractive alternative to go to BIW or MMA after school. So they obviously have a vested interest but uh there are a lot of basic trades that a lot of students just don't have any knowledge of.

That's something that was quoted many times was there are a lot of students that don't still come in don't know how to use a tape measure. So um and I did find the document for the third project. It's the elevator which seems important.

Thank you both. And I know um I'm sure you'll give us updates in the future about those the possible special election, those possible expenses.

Colin, yeah, I think just the only other thing I would add is that um just I can't now remember when this was presented to the board, maybe two years ago. Um but the um region 10 has been ex um uh pursuing the idea of a 4-year technical um uh school. Um it could not be in the existing location. That wouldn't work.

Uh the question of whether that could happen um at the um main maritime space or somewhere else on the um Brunswick landing um property is still in um is still open. But that's a really that's that's sort of the only uh as far as I'm can remember that's really the only largecale kind of increase in programming that is really um has been really considered. There's not really much capacity to do it. I think even with the um the Brunswick landing and just to be very transparent that um while uh I think personally I think that is a fantastic idea, it would have very serious impacts on um enrollment and state funding um because uh if we if students could enroll students in Freeport could enroll directly um into the technical high school that would not be that would be monies that are not coming um to uh RSC5.

Um, so I think that is a that's a question that, you know, if it if it becomes a proposal, we would have to uh think about very seriously.

And I know that's something they've been discussing since I was on that board like seven years ago. So I don't know that it's imminent. And um, yeah. Okay. And I know that we've had the region 10 superintendent come in the past to brief the board. So if the board had other questions in the future, I'm sure that's something you all could pursue or we could pursue. Um, okay. And Steph, so I have an update. Excuse me, I have a frog in my throat also. Uh, I have an update from the MSBA delegate assembly that was held on Saturday, October 18th, and I attended as our delegate. There were many spirited discussions amongst the delegates as the proposed resolutions and changes to resolutions um were voted on. And in advance we um I had passed along the suggestions that we had as a board and the questions that we had. And of the two suggestions that we made for language change, one was adopted by the board before the assembly and that was I believe Chris you were the one who suggested changing the proposed resolution three about immigrant students to using more affirmative language. Um, so the new resolution read, "The Main School Board Association is committed to maintaining a safe and secure learning environment for all students, staff, and visitors, and believes that regardless of their immigration stat immigration status, all students should have access to a free public education." So that was what went to the assembly and that resolution was passed.

And then the other suggestion that we had was to 2B1s around artificial intelligence in school. And we had suggested that the last sentence read AI is not a substitute for school work period in lie of A is not a substitute for school work that requires original thought. And so I and many people um asked questions and discussed and the consensus was that uh there's a very delicate balance between being welcoming to AI technologies in schools and where that technology should be used and that this will continue to be something that's discussed and revised probably annually. So um it passed as was so um see what happens. And then as far as overall voting outcomes, the assembly voted to approve all of the new resolutions as well as all the changes and all the um changes to the governing documents. There was only one item that didn't pass and it was resolution 3B5D probationary employment period around the changing from 2-year probationary contract of teachers to three. So the there was also a lot of discussion around that and the vote was to keep it at two. Um, and so the the board will decide if they want to continue to explore that. So that's it.

Thank you so much, Steph, for attending. Steph, I just wanted to say that today, just today, I was at the main state superintendent association's annual conference. Robbie Fineberg was there and he actually gave a shout out to you for your contributions at this event. To me? Yeah. Wow. Thank you.

So kuzzah. That's great. See, we told you it'd be fun. I couldn't do it without you all.

Thank you, Steph. Appreciate you taking that on. Uh Cara, uh yeah, I wanted to take a moment to recognize you, Mora, for your seven years of board service. I believe this is your last year.

And I want to thank you personally for inviting me to join the board. I was one of your victims. I mean, beneficiaries of um of your constant um advocacy for our district and wanting to make sure there's uh strong board representation, but also that uh our students are getting their needs met from um safety to um to their rights to evidence-based curriculum um and on and on and on. And I know you've been participating on hiring committees and um a number of other areas. How many what which committees have you served on in your seven years? Oh gosh, I can't.

Not all of them. Never policy. I always wanted to do that one, but never policy. Never policy, but a lot of a lot of the others. Yeah. So, finance, curriculum, um I just joined facilities. I did one facilities meeting. So, um a lot of different committees and a lot of work that you've put in over the seven years. So, thank you so much. Thank you, Karen. We will miss you.

And I'm just going to piggyback on that um to say that while you did not um uh seek me out as one of your victims uh to join the the board, when I joined, I was very much um looking for, you know, looking around the room to sort of look for for guidance on how to be how to be a school board member and what are the different ways that one can be a school board member. Um and I have been impressed since I joined with just the professionalism that you bring um in the midst of any conversation um and how um and how seriously you take this work.

Um, and while no one would have any idea in watching the way that I comport myself in these board meetings, um, I have learned a great deal from you, um, and I'm very thankful, um, for that modeling and also just thankful for your, um, commitment to, uh, social justice in our, uh, district and to your desire to make sure that, um, vulnerable communities are supported and that advocacy, uh, will not be forgotten, nor will it end.

So, thank you. Thank you all and I'm I'm grateful for you too and I was going to save this till the end because this is my uh last board meeting but I'm I'm all always awe inspired by the incredible amount of thought and work and effort that goes in um from our staff, from our administrators, from our teachers, from everyone in RSU5. I'm honored to have had this opportunity to be on the board and I just I appreciate you all so much more than I can say. And as a parent and a community member, I'm really proud of the work that you all do and the work that we've done together. So, thank you so much, Danielle. Can't be about me.

Thank you, Mora. Um, so I we today we had our curriculum meeting. It was our October meeting. Um, we're going to be doing one every month. I think we told you guys that the last time that we discussed this. Um, and it was an update. Erica gave us a very, um, big update on budget. Uh, she has developed kind of a three-year plan over some changes um, for the curriculum. Um, we didn't discuss specific costs. I know she's still working on that, but um, obviously there's going to be some costs that'll come to the budget. Um, we talked about maybe some costs that already came up that was not expected.

Um, but I think it's a good um, highlight of some changes that'll come in supporting, you know, literacy, science, and math. So, um, a lot of big changes and stuff coming forward and that's a newer committee for the board and I think it's fantastic. Um I've had an opportunity to serve on that with Danielle and it's um been really great learning and as well as Anna and um I'm so glad that we have that. Uh so thank you.

Okay. Uh facilities and operations committee Kelly.

This is a little awkward because I wasn't there. So Oh, right. Would you like to take this one and I can take the fin?

Oh gosh. I'm sorry I didn't bring my notes. Michelle was the only um other person there and she's not here either. Um, yes, I'd be happy to. Um, so as you heard from, um, uh, from Kelly, there will be a request tonight about um, the need for additional funds for the Durham Community School automation system. Um, and because of we didn't have the funds in the place, we were restricted. Kelly can explain it better than I can. We're restricted into uh where we can move funds from a capital reserve account without uh the approval of the board. That will be coming to you um later in the agenda um for approval.

Um so we can talk about that more. At that time, we also got an update on the turf field, which um largely echoed, I think, information that the board had already received um tracking the safety and the testing that they did for it and um some repairs that are going to be taking place.

Thankfully, the GMAX testing passed. Yes. And yes, really with flying colors, it did was really important.

Yes, we got the GMAX testing results um for uh safety and prevention of like concussions. Um, and they were all great and we were able to review those in the facilities committee. Um, so that was great. And I know the board has received an email about scheduling the board facilities tour. So um, please get in touch with Jenny um about your availability to um uh to attend that if you would like to. Um, and then we also had an update on ADA egress. Um there was a request to um have an automatic or well there was a a specific request to access the peace garden and so um Glenn actually reached out to uh state um uh state I think ADA auditor and had that person come and tour the entire high school and look at all the ADA accessibility. So, not just for that one spot, but throughout the high school, which is very great and um diligent work on on Glenn's part. And they found a few other things that also need to be updated, including an automatic door opener installed on the front entrance.

Um and uh they decided on a short-term solution for ramps on access to various doors um at FHS, but they'll work on a long-term solution through the budget process, which would, you know, require more funds if they need to do some sort of paving or changing um changing things around beyond those um beyond those ramps. And we also got an update on the phase 2 energy audit projects and um further discussion of those will occur in the future. Okay.

Okay. Finance committee.

Is that Michelle? Okay. So, Kelly, are you doing the report tonight? Yes.

So the finance committee met on September 24th and um during that time we um onboarded our new members with uh a sort of overview of how the warrant signing process works.

Um they also reviewed the energy audit and vehicle equipment replacement financing report. The good news is that we had some um cost savings. We expected the uh energy audit annual payment to be um 293,000 and it's coming in at $254,455.

So a little bit less. Uh so that's a 17-year lease purchase through the Bank of America at a rate of 4.35%.

The vehicle and equipment uh replacing program, again, a little bit of a cost savings. We expected our projection to be 168,000 and the annual payment is actually coming in a little bit less at 165,000.

So again, some good news.

The budget process, we already heard from the superintendent about uh some of the initial phases of that process. Uh some of the li listening sessions that superintendent Gray is performing with the schools and departments and some of the surveys that have gone out. he did review those with the finance committee.

And um they also talked about some uh special education positions that are currently being funded through um let's see, they're they're currently being funded through a reserve account.

Uh those positions are a full-time nurse onetoone, a 30-hour per week speech language pathologist, and a five-hour per week teacher of the deaf. Um those are costs that we anticipate will need to be carried forward into the coming years. And so we will anticipate that those will need to be rolled into the regular budget starting this next season.

Um let's see. Finally, we did last we we have already um voted on this, but we did have to increase uh our anticipated needs for the track restriping and turf. Um we did vote on that at our last or two meetings ago, I guess, to appropriate $28,000 towards those projects. And I anticipate by now we probably have spent that money.

And um yeah, CDS transition, we've had a little bit of a discussion on that, but we will likely have some budgetary implications beginning in July of 2028.

So that's something that's ongoing and I'm sure we'll be hearing more about that in the coming months.

Thank you, Kelly. Carol, I have a question about those positions that have been in the reserve account.

Can you refresh my memory as to when that when those positions were moved into that account or were they did they originate there and what that um what that why that happened that way.

So they were not anticipated positions.

So they are um I believe it was uh Superintendent Scrapper that actually um had come to you to actually fill those positions. Um we attempted to fill them both uh all actually all of the positions um through the budget first like advertising and making them reserve positions. The board did approve the use of the funds for that um and because they were not expected they were not part of the local budget. The whole purpose of setting up the reserve accounts was to be able to be reactive to needs such as these for when students move into the district or newly uh new needs um become identified.

And so again, like we're doing later tonight to talk about an item for the capital reserve fund, um we did come forward to the board to talk about the article 2 reserve special education and the need to fill these positions. Thank you for refreshing my memory.

Thanks, Kylie. Um, policy.

Okay. So, I'm I'm going to uh report out on just the basic framework of what we did in our policy committee meeting and then we can transition into the um policy uh the actual policy review itself. So, we met um on Thursday, October 2nd uh via Google Meet. a reminder that um anyone in the public is welcome to uh to join us uh to um bear witness to those uh meetings. Just as a good reminder, if you'd like to attend um you can do so um but you will not be able to be participate um because uh any feedback from the public that we might um you might have uh we would really need that to go to the whole uh board.

So come to public comment to present that or um write us at our uh email address. Um so we uh as you may remember we we break down our um policy review into a couple different categories. Um they're they're policies that we need to review um based on changes to law. Um and so we looked at um uh JKAA use of physical restraint and seclusion um and its associated um R its associated procedure. um there has been a ch the law change on that which we'll talk about a little bit later. So we talked about that and then as part of our um regular review process um where we identify uh needs as a district um uh of policies that need to be um updated to come into alignment with um our current practices. We looked at IHPA which is programs for multilingual learners um and the uh procedure that is linked to that um the RSU number five allow plan.

Um we were hoping to get to two others um or to bullying which is GICK um and its administrative procedures but uh we ran out of time even though we talked for two hours and six minutes. Uh, but we decided to go do something else with our time and to come back and talk about that another day. Uh, I think that's all I want to say about that.

That's surprising. That doesn't sound like you all at all. Which part? The two hours.

Oh, yeah. Not at all. Yeah. Normally done like five or six minutes. Um, okay. Thank you, Colin. Um, okay.

So, policy review. Um, and I think we're going to take these al together, but if the board as a motion um, but if the board would like to not do that, I suppose we consider that as well.

Would it be helpful to have just a brief explanation of of what first? Yeah. Before we get the motion on the floor. Yes.

Um, yes. Um, so you mean the presentations that we're going to hear from folks about specifically about the Lao plan?

You're gonna That's one of them. And then the other one is the restraint and seclusion one about which there isn't a presentation but I can summarize the change in the law.

That sounds good. Why don't we do that and then we can decide how we want to take the motions. Okay great. Um, so Erica, right?

So, Superintendent Gray, did you want to address the policy piece, the standalone policy piece first or Sure. I'll just make it quick and sweet.

So the the standalone policy is basically a policy that says we have to have a law plan. That is all that the policy says other than that also the board must approve the law plan. So the LA plan which assistant superintendent medo will discuss in greater detail um gets down into how we have to deliver service for our multilingual learners.

Um, and that is a procedure. It's an administrative procedure. That's not a policy. But in this case, main state law requires that school boards approve that procedure. So that's why it's coming to you to be approved. Not all procedures fall into that category. Um, I think that's it. Colin, I should probably I think I might just uh add to that that um so yes, as a matter of course for any any board policy uh which IHPA is one of um we have to uh do go through our first read and second read um process. Also the plan uh currently lives as a board procedure. It does not currently live as an administrative procedure. Um even though it is an administrative procedure, it doesn't live there. Um so one of the things that we will be um uh requesting tonight is that the board um approve the administration's recommendation that we pull um IHBR the LAOW plan itself um out of um what would be considered a board um a board approved policy procedure.

We have that's why we were there for two hours and six minutes. Uh because there's some there's some intricacy in there which we uh will get into a little bit later. But effectively what it means is um we are recommending that we're going to pull the law plan out of um the regular board review process which requires a first and second read. Um however, we will in accordance with law uh still be required to review that um uh once a year um which uh assistant superintendent Mateo will uh speak to.

um in a bit. Thank you, Colin.

Yes, I think that's I'm just gonna find it.

I'm just gonna find it again. It went away.

Um Erica, while you're getting that set up, maybe I will just draw our attention to the um IHBA uh policy itself um and just talk us through a little bit of what we have um what we have uh what we're recommending to to change there. So if you look um at and whenever you want to interrupt me, let's just interrupt. Let's now now we're going to have allow plan which is better than me talking there with the times.

Okay. So um Jill is back here with me because this has really been a team effort. We have two other colleagues um Lynn and Lana who have also contributed their body of expertise to arriving at a an agreement on what what is a um what is a law plan that both reflects our practices and and um complies with all of the legal requirements, the guidance from the state of Maine, um best practices and lessons learned from other districts who have had some of their practices tested.

Um, so also contributing to this presentation, uh, Justin Kerry from Drummond Woodsome and again some of you had met April Perkins who is the former state director for multilingual services and is currently a multilinger lingual director in a district. So has seen almost the entire state's LA law plans.

So great re human resources. So the three the four of us as well as um Justin and April.

Okay, so the first question is what is a LAW plan and we will get into that uh slide by slide. Why is the LA plan important? Um what are we updating in our allow plan and then um what has um sorry updating our allow plan will do um this what is updated in the plan and then what do we need to do next?

Okay. So, allow plan offers us a roadmap as a district for um programming that describes how we meet federal and state civil rights requirements with regard to students who are still acquiring English language. Um Lao refers to this case Lao versus Nichols which was a a landmark Supreme Court case confirming the school's obligation to ensure that multilingual learners learn English and obtain equitable access to curriculum.

And that equitable access is where the testing has happened. Testing uh as to whether equitable access has been delivered.

Um it's important because it fulfills the requirement that we have in our policy which was referred to briefly there uh before we started this presentation.

Um and that policy IHBA refers to programming for English learners. It provides clarity and consistency in terms of the policy and programming across all of the schools. So it's how we operationalize our recommendations across all schools, grade levels and developmental ranges both from a language perspective and in age. Um it serves as a publicfacing document. So the document our allow document is intended to offer um information for every stakeholder and uh and offer that information in a transparent way.

Um updating our allow plan provides alignment with federal and state policy.

It ensures our information is accurate and upto-date and it fulfills our civil rights obligations.

Um in our specific recommended LA plan update um we have corrected identification procedures. So I mentioned that in our home language survey how do we identify needs from regist points of registration.

Um it offers Jill if you'd like to hop in on any of this or questions later please feel free. It offers greater detail on um our approach to how we engage in service provisions including the general service amount. So we quantify based on language acquisition stage we quantify the exact service amount minimally and the frequency level by level.

Um there are new sections in our new Lao plan that address equitable access to opportunities including advanced coursework. Um there are equitable personnel, facilities and materials allocations in the written into the plan. Um there is an explicit uh charge to us to conduct a program review annually at a minimum. Um, and then the interpretation and translation services that I reviewed before, the commitment that we make to do that, not the services named, but rather the commitment to do that is addressed in the Lao plan.

Um, so the school board's role is to address the policy IHBA, that uh program for English learners, which basically says we have a plan. Um, the proposed LA plan has been vetted by the experts I named, Justin, April, and the team of um, staff who have been with you for many years. Um, it's been reviewed, modified. We've been working on this since June. We've been really leaning into this for many months. Um, and then recommended for adoption. Um, there is installed in this um, proposal a an annual review of the Lao plans. will never like get behind on it. Um it would be addressed annually. Um my office would lead that work and then I would be collaborating with the multilingual teaching team to ensure that the information and um charge set out in the plan is um is accurate and meaningful for our learners and reflects our needs and um our service structures and constructs.

So happy to take any questions you have about the Lao plan. The plan itself I think we decided not to present the plan itself but rather to give an overview of Yes. Not in the slide deck. Not in the slide deck. Yeah.

Yeah. Yeah. So, I think just for sake of um organizational clarity, this is sort of the time where the board will ask any questions of Erica and Jill about um uh this thing called the allow plan, why we have it um and any changes that we've made um to it. We are not currently talking about uh the draft itself.

But maybe everything was so awesome and clear that we can just go and talk to itself in a moment. Any any questions for um our friends here before we move on?

You took something that was very complicated and took us a long time to wrap at least the board members to wrap our little heads around and you presented it extremely clearly. So, thank you very much for putting that together.

Steph, I guess are there any notable large changes or big changes that um you would want to draw attention to specifically?

For me, one of the biggest changes is the interpretation and translation for families. wasn't really in the LA plan at all and it was a huge missing link.

Um, when we would deal with region 10, when we would deal with other things, people just don't know where to go for that translation and interpretation. And so now we have these systems in place that we need people to be trained in and understand and vetted through the district so that not only are they there, but people know how to use them.

So I guess that's like we have a lot of moving parts in this LA plan and the improvements and safeguards that it gives to our students. Um but there's a lot to be trained upon and and I guess there's always work to do.

Danielle, when you talk about the training, is it not just training for the three of you though, right? We're talking about schoolwide training so that everybody's on the same page and you're then that support as they go out into Yeah, definitely. Especially with like the interpretation pieces. I mean, office staff and nurses and everyone needs to know how to use those pieces. Um, and I think it's the same with SCOP, like we mentioned earlier, the programming and things like that behind the the model. um making sure that people not only understand but are are trained in the new pieces of the law plan.

So then my follow-up question is are you happy with the changes and you feel that this better supports you and the students and their families at the at the district?

This new allow plan is much more holistically rounded than our last one.

the last one we had been asking for a review on for the since I got here four years ago. This is my fourth year now. Um there was just a lot lacking in it.

There was things that were in there that we didn't do. There was things that were in there that we did do. Um and so I really feel like this protects our multilingual students greatly um and protects their families and their stake in the community that they have as a whole.

Valerie.

So the next obvious question I think is does this kind of redefine what our minimum staffing requirements are as a district versus what the state definition is? Because that was something that we've already tonight as a definition have bumped up against of we're over staff but we're not over staffed because I'm I'm going to take a stab at that. Okay.

It it doesn't so much touch on our minimum staffing. It does lay out, for example, if you have a student who gets this certain score on the language acquisition test that they all have to take, what the guidelines are for how much service that student should get um based on the students that we have, where they are, the number of staff we have. We're we have plenty of coverage for that. It there is flexibility with that, too. We don't have to do it exactly the same way that the LA plan suggests. we can take it on a student by student basis and be adaptive to what those kids need. Um, in which case we have really great flexible teachers who can be creative and responsive. Um, what it does to me the important parts are it tells us how we have to screen everybody and make sure that right from the get-go when a kid is enrolled in school, we're looking to see if they might need English language support. And then it gives us those guidelines for how much service they should get. And it then tells us you c it it has provision provisions to the effect that we can't conflate special ed and English language use. You can't say which is a common problem in many school districts. We also can't limit kids who intellectually and cognitively are ready for really advanced coursework just because their English isn't where our English instruction is. We like we couldn't take a kid from Colombia who came in with uh advanced coursework background who's ready for AP Bio and tell them you can't take AP Bio because your English isn't we'd have to provide the English language support. It's a lot of things like that that that's where it it nails down our commitment and the the translation um and interpretation services so that we can actually speak to those kids and their families. And some other ways that that shows up was like medical forms, cafeteria, you know, how do you translate pigs in a blanket?

That's an actual example from a school where I taught. And unfortunately, a school with a child with religious restrictions walked into violating his religious restrictions because how do you translate pigs in a blanket? Um, so it's it sets us up much better to meet those needs. Thank you.

Yeah.

Thank you both for your diligent work on this. It's really great. Okay.

Yeah. So, I think if I'm understanding the or the organization of the evening now, perhaps uh Superintendent um you might go through the overview of the uh law changes that we will in a moment then look at when we actually make the motion to then look at the first read if I'm understanding that process correctly. Is that true?

Sure. Well, with respect to this program MLL, it's not a law change.

No, no, I know. No, I know. I'm I'm transitioning away um from that. But we uh we're teeing up the next I'm teeing up the next thing uh if to try to adapt on the fly here to uh the world. Uh so I suppose it is possible that when we actually uh make the motion um to discuss the um the policy, we might have some more questions for our uh our friends Erica and Jill. Uh but I think that's just the way things are going to work.

Like to make a motion Are you are you looking to me to answer that question? Colin, I think that our superintendent perhaps could speak to the um the law changes that are necessitating our uh looking at the And now I'm scrolling madly for it because there's so many different abbreviations. The JKAA uh just so we get that out of the way before we then make the motion and then talk about things because we're just very technically accurate with what we do here.

It's up to you. I think you could probably take them all together. Okay. All right. Um, so with regard to JKA and JKA-R, these are policies that relate to our use of physical restraint and seclusion, a policy and a procedure. There was a change in the law that has prompted us to revisit these. And the sum summarizing the change in the law is the law is trying the legislature is making it easier for educators to use restraint and seclusion than they had before.

There had been a previous change in the law a handful of years ago and by handful I think it was like four or five years ago that really made established very strict criteria for when restraint or seclusion could be used. the legislature was responding to feedback from schools that those limitations have made it really challenging to respond to difficult dangerous situations. So if you look at the way the policy is changed um physical restraint there's a change in the use of the word voluntary.

So the the changed policy policy says a physical prompt is a teaching technique that involves new word voluntary physical contact with the student and enables the student to learn or model the physical movement necessary for the development of the desired competency.

The easiest example I could give there is let me show you how to hold a pencil and like actually like put your hand on the child's hand and help them hold the pencil, learn how to grip their pencil.

It could be a PE teacher saying let me tell you how to swing a tennis racket.

That kind of thing. That is where the where the teacher is voluntarily touching the child. Um, another instance where the policy is changed has to do with the risk of serious physical injury. So, the guideline had been that you're not to use restraint or seclusion unless there is an imminent risk of serious physical injury to the child or another person.

And the risk of intervening, the risk of not intervening is judged to be greater than the risk of intervening.

So, but there was question about well, what is serious physical injury? That wasn't defined. That has been further defined as um an injury that would require intervention by a medical practitioner including but not limited to a school nurse.

Whereas previously it was an emergency room visit.

So this means you are allowed to intervene with restraint or seclusion if child's going to punch a wall and they may you know there's a risk of a bruise or something that would routinely send them to the school nurse. It doesn't have to rise to the level of going to the ER.

So, those are the major changes.

Thank you so much, Super Gray. Now, I think Cara, you might have had a motion you wanted to make. How is it worded?

Um, do I have a motion for consideration and approval of first read of the following policies procedures? IHBA, programs for multilingual learners. IHBA RSU5 LA Plan. JKAA use of physical restraint and seclusion. JKAA-R procedures on physical restraint and seclusion.

Cara Malik, we bring for you before you tonight the policy HIBA uh program for multilingual learners.

Its purpose has been described uh to you eloquently already. If you look uh you'll see this the um the the the primary changes that have been made um really have to do um with uh our previous policy I think we could say had excessive operational detail. Uh and so we have um we have trimmed that down a bit and basically just uh are effectively making sure that we say that we are maintaining a plan. Um and here is where you can find it. Um and it is uh been brought up uh to to um in in up to date with Drman Woodson's uh model and also the DOE expectations.

Um any questions about the policy not the R not the LA plan but the the IHBA.

I guess this is also where I say this is where I would say if the board wants to like mess around with language like this is your chance like this is your chance.

This is the this is where you can do that. I would recommend that we not muck around uh with the Lao plan uh itself uh for a variety of reasons. Um if we have obviously if we have questions and require clarification or if there are uh typos or something we should obviously pick that out. Um but this is not a place to um flex our uh poetic uh sensibilities. That would be now in the policy is where we do that if you want to do that. Or maybe everybody just loves it because we've got it perfect.

Beautiful. Um so uh we are also bringing um before you the the IHB R which is currently a board procedure.

And so just to clarify um because we had a long conversation about this um in our uh what did we call it? Our sort of stable our bullpen or the collection of all of the policies. What do we call it? I don't remember either of those terms.

No, because I because I can't remember the actual words. So I'm I'm just going with words.

Exact exactly. Uh go socks. Um the on our website uh where we store all of our um information about our policies, you will see our policies uh listed. And then also when there are associated board procedures um that has a little R next to it. Anything that is on that page that has a little R next to it um is treated with the same process as a board policy. So it goes through a first and second read and requires um board approval. Um what we are recommending tonight is that we will um we're uh recommending that we remove um IHB R um from being a board uh policy procedure and it will continue to exist as administrative procedure but it will not um be subject going forward to the same um board review process.

Can I clarify that please?

So there are there are some administrative procedures that the board can choose to endorse or not. If the board endorses a procedure, it doesn't mean it becomes a policy, but it does mean that I can't just by fiat change the procedure. It would have to come back to the board. So what Colin is saying is that with the Law plan, it will still remain a procedure will be housed on the website.

It's on the policy page and if you look on the right hand side of that page, there's a whole list of procedures that actually the board has endorsed.

This particular one, the LA plan, the state of Maine says school boards need to endorse that procedure because they want you to be aware of it and to own it. Um, you don't need to do a first and second read of a procedure that you endorse. So, if you vote to approve it tonight, it's done and we'll probably review it every year, but it doesn't need to come back to you until that time.

Policies need to go through a first and second read.

Yeah, I think just for context as you may remember um back when we had to um because of the court ruling we had to change our um title n change documentation for title n and that was relevant both to policies and to procedures. Um so that was language where again we were um we had to make sure that those were changed in both of those in both of those places. So that's a sort of an example of what that would what that would be. Um so this would be the moment where if you have any questions about um the text of the Lao plan itself, this is where you would um voice those uh questions um with the understanding that again are we've had some uh some friends who've been working on this incredibly hard uh and uh this is really their area of expertise. So, this is more um a moment to say, well, I guess let me be very clear. The recommendation is um that we pull this out of the um uh board regular board reviewed procedure. Um you do not have to accept that. If you do not want to do that, if you want to keep this as something that we um uh have to put through a first and second read, we can do that. That's um that's our discretion. Um the policy committee at the recommendation of the administration does not believe that we should do that.

We believe that we should pull it out and make it and simplify it. Um simplify the process. So questions about the Lao plan text itself which I will not answer. I will turn it over to people who know things about it.

Danielle, um I have two questions. Well, I'll start with my first one, and I think Kelly had um mentioned this one um earlier to the board and via an email.

Um there's a lot of abbreviations, acronyms, whatever we want to call them, and I feel like some of them I can never figure out what they are. So, I don't know, do we need to have like a a little glossery of terms so that everybody knows what what they are because there's a lot of them. Um so that's my first question. Would that be helpful or something that we could add so that you know when we are looking at it we kind of understand it? Um you know I half joked with Jill on the way in that um when I read this I'm completely confused about what has happened and English is my first language and um so I I get a little anxious that this could be really confusing and complex for people that don't speak English as their first language. um even translating it with all those abbreviations. So yeah, just on that Daniel, thank you for flagging that and Kelly, thank you for your original note on that. I think an example would be on the second page um that we have uh we have MLL service values uh statement uh though I think we can say that MLL so far in the document has not been defined. Um and then in the under the purpose of the plan uh the it says and supporting ML MLS suggesting that an ML is a thing. Uh and that is a thing that is different from an MLL. Um so I think that I think that is the um maybe one of the examples that Kelly was speaking to and Daniel was amplifying.

Does that make sense?

Certainly. And we could go through and create a legend and or we could spell out at the every first instance where this um acronym creation occurs. Um I think that was the intention and maybe it got lost in some editing because see it with like MTSS is spelled out the first time it appears. Um so also if it appears early in the document then later in the document maybe the reader might not remember. So, it does seem to benefit to just spell it out perhaps even every time. Um, but we're happy to take guidance on that. And certainly, we're intending that the that this be accessible um for our stakeholders um so that they know how to leverage their rights and what their rights are.

Yeah, that sounds great. And I think and I think that I I think part of it is just a is just a a consistency. I think I am now putting it together um a little late in the game. Um that multilingual is uh considered one word. Um so an MLL service value statement like that second that first L should not be there uh because actually it's a lowercase L. Um so I think that's the kind of thing I think that we're referring to just to sort of make sure that that's clear so that someone's not unless I'm missing something. Those are the same thing, right? Okay, cool.

Yeah, just to piggyback on that, I think um later in the document it seems like we're using a different term to refer to the same thing. Now we're referring to them as ELLs.

Oh, let's see somewhere else. ESOL instead of yeah page four um in paragraph paragraph three um uh second line of that paragraph access for ELLL's assessment and and also in the first paragraph oh yeah we still use that term so ESOL is how the state describes the services which is a complication provided to us by the state um and it if they were to reference where their rights are or what it means in the context of their learner's day. This ESOL language is is unfortunately a sort of parallel way of explaining the same thing, but the state has not officially transitioned to MLL in all of its um in all of its own language. So that does offer us some Yeah. So, I think I mean I think I might say that the to Daniel's uh request I think that maybe adding a page that just clarifies and cross references those things. Um so that uh yeah that just provides a key for that. I don't think it would substantively change anything that you're actually saying we do or need to do. Um would that absolutely work? Danielle and Kelly, if the board would like to sorry if if the board would like to approve it as it is, we can certainly add that piece.

Yeah, I guess I would say I would feel comfortable if if you were open to doing that. That would not I would we wouldn't need to see that again. I would say if the conversation goes on and there's other things that we have questions about, that might be a different question. But I think this is the sort of thing where I would feel comfortable uh suggesting uh we can approve it if that is put in. Uh Danielle had another thing.

My my other question was I'm again I'm kind of assuming this but the stuff that's highlighted in purple is that going to be something like you click on to get more information. Those are going to be links within the plan itself to further Okay.

They do go to the web and sometimes they're referencing case law and other documents. Yeah.

I printed out some of those things. I don't know if you would be interested in them. I have a couple of them just because as I was reading through it, I was looking at all the parts and pieces.

So, they're all they're all good. Check.

I might suggest maybe as a footer some of the acronym explanations because there there are reoccurring events across multiple pages and waiting to put a legend at the end of the document the opportunity to understand might be forgotten or missed. Um so perhaps a footer.

Yeah, I think I mean if we I mean this is again where this is and now again no longer a board or would no longer be a board procedure. But I think what we we would we've done historically in a lot of our documents is that early in the um document put a um def uh defining terms.

So like a section zero uh before section one. Um that might be a place to put it to to your point of like having it happen early not not late. Yeah.

Um, Colin, clarifying question. Because of how the motion is written, um, I see that it's still IHB-R, will it still have that lettering like that label? And Okay. And is this vote the way that um I'm assuming the way that the motion is written then that as you described will make this no longer a board procedure but when we are voting on this this is going to be approving this um as a as a procedure as you and Tom outlined.

Correct. So that's what we have. So what we have here isn't approval of a board procedure. It's approval of changing to a non-board procedure.

And I will and I will Yeah. And I will own I'm the minority report on on this one. I don't I will just say I don't like it remaining as an R. Um I think it's confusing because in 5 years uh when uh I'm not going to be here uh hopefully Tom will be here. Uh but like 15 years from now um this is going to live as an R and that board and that superintendent and that assistant superintendent is not going to know that it has to go through a different review cycle.

It it has my my my point is that my point is that the the RSU5 board has a procedure for reviewing everything that is on that page and that is what we will continue to what we have done and we will continue to do. So if we making an alteration to that, there needs to be something that is flat flagging that as different. If we want to put like if we want to put something in blinking lights at the top of that procedure that says like yo when you look at this like this is not a this is not go through the normal cycle. This is just has to be approved once a year. That's totally fine. But I think just we have to be conscious of the people down the pike um that we are not confusing them because there are people 15 years ago that have confused the hell out of us by not flagging those things.

So if the board approves a procedure, which in this case the state wants you to do for this one, it gets a designation as either a dash r or there are some that are more like that are a dash eee which is an exhibit.

That's usually a form or a checklist or something like that that we would use in practice. Um, so like the bullying procedure or the harassment procedure us an R does not it's not usually a form that you would actually fill in. An E is a form that you would actually fill in.

In this case, when you put your endorsement on it tonight, if you do that, you it it will become a a board endorsed procedure and it will gain that designation of - R.

And our vote will also be that we are agreeing that will no longer be a board procedure, but it will be a board approved procedure from now going forward.

Board approved administrative administrative procedure. Okay. So we when we vote that will also be agreeing to that. Yes. Okay. Cara.

And the only difference really is that there's not a second read. There's not that is really the only difference is that we're still the board is still reviewing it and making possibly making suggestions for edits. Sure.

But it doesn't come back to us for us to say thank you for making those edits. I have no other edits or here we have more edits. Correct.

I think I think I I mean I think I would amend that actually. I think it is I think going forward it would be a different process because it would not be something brought through the policy committee. Um, so I think it would be something that, for example, I think, uh, Erica, we talked about doing this in like June or something like the annual board retreat.

Oh, sorry, the annual board retreat. So that'll be August.

Um, so it would not be something that is on the agenda as being something that the policy committee is working on, the policy committee is bringing forward for board approval. It's something that would be its own line item that Erica would be bringing forward to say, we're doing our annual review of this. Can we have approval? and we say yay nay or here's some questions and that's a change in the review schedule then too because and that is a change in review schedule as well. Yeah. Okay. Thank you for the clarification.

Um other questions about this policy or the physical restraint and seclusion policies before we vote.

Let's finish this before we go to physical done with this.

Uh no that's what I'm saying. If we are done with this, then we can move on. But let's just make sure we're done with this. Or do we have any more thoughts about IHBA or uh the LA plan itself? Or can we let Jill go home?

Maybe she wants to see the vote.

The vote will be will be fun. Don't watch it. You can you can watch it on video. So I just have a clarification question.

Um I come from a science realm where these are two very different things. Is one a policy and one is a procedure or they're both policies?

One one will be a policy.

The first one's a policy. The R is a procedure. Correct.

I mean the procedure is how do we carry out the policy? It's a finer grain of sand.

Right. But it's directions which makes it a procedure. Correct. Thank you.

Okay. So, any further questions about one items one or two for policy review?

You all did a hell of a thing. It's great. Great plan. Well done.

Thank you so much, Jill. And thank your co thank you to your colleagues as well and Erica for all of your hard work on this. Um, questions about the physical restraint and seclusion policy or procedure.

Right. So, Superintendent Gray walked us through the the re the the rationale for why we are bringing this before you.

It's a it's a law change and um and I really appreciate you walking us through kind of how this plays out both in terms of how it impacts our students and how it impacts our staff. Um those are the only um changes I think other than uh some little uh uh style changes. For example, RSU number five um is just keeping with our um but otherwise it's just changes for the law which again generally are not something that we want to mess with. Kelly, this is really minor, so you hate to even mention it, but there is a a word that seems to be missing on page two of three, section C number two. Um, the removal of the of seems a little awkward without it.

Which word? Which word that isn't there?

Which invisible word do you Yeah. It says um independent of staff using physical force for the purpose and then of is struck out overcoming a student's resistance.

And if voluntary means that a student cooperates with the request. Kelly, which page was that?

This is page two of three um on JKAA. So you're asking to unstrike. Yes. Yeah. I think I think that's a good No, you you I'm glad you spoke up, Kelly.

That should not be struck out unless English works differently now than it did before, which I'll have to go on the internet and check that later or talk to my middle school. You would be the one to know, Colin.

I would not. The middle school knows all of those things.

So, we would like to take the of not and not strike it anymore so that it's an proper English sentence. Keep the of.

Keep the of. Valerie. Oh, sorry. We were just waving.

Yeah. Got it. Uh, good catch, Kelly. Um, others. Danielle, sorry. I I think I I figured out the answer, but I thought I would just ask to clarify. So um on in the procedure part of the of it so page nine of 11 at first I was wondering the difference but I think you figured out so G says aggregate number of uses of physical restraint and the next one H aggregate number of students placed. So I'm assuming that we count the number of uses of physical restraint because we might use more than one on a particular student. Yeah. Okay. I I I thought that was the case. Then my other um thing is that when you go to page six of 11, I notice in the when they go through the incident reports on like what everything is going to contain, number three says right away it asks about individual education or 504 plans. But we're kind of asking that same question on number 19. I didn't know if there was a reason we had to have both.

Sorry. What was the first one you um This is on page uh seven of 11. Yeah, six of 11. Six. Six of 11.

It's Oh, I see. Number three. That does seem to have an event that one and then the repetition and number 19. It just seems like it it asks but kind of asks a little bit more. So, I don't know. Did we have could we combine them?

I personally I don't feel that it matters. This is based on the sample policy that we received from our council. Um so my my answer in those cases as usually is that the people who know the law better than we do have suggested it. Um as I look at it, I don't think it it harms us to leave it the way it is. But I do see the redundancy you're pointing out.

Uh yeah, I think I think I'm agnostic on it. I mean, I think um I think functionally uh if you're someone who needs to use this document, you find the information that you need. Uh like is it is there that redundancy? Yes. But um I think I'd agree with Superintendent Gray that we just leave that as is for the moment.

Okay. Oh, wait. Maybe I found a thing. Let's just look at 14. 14 for a second.

14 on page seven of 11.

What's going on with less restrictive interventions tried to prior to the use of physical restraint or seclusion?

So, when you write up the incident report, you have to No, I'm sorry. I'm I'm confused about the the pun how we're punctuating and how we are capitalizing things. I'm just confused as what are we saying is the punctuation between seclusion and if you mean is that is is that period is that what you mean Colin physical restraint 14 less restrictive interventions tried prior to the use of physical restraint or seclusion so oh I see what's happening the The uppercase I is struck out, the lowercase I is put in, and there's a comma, but the comma's been struck out technically, so it's a period.

And no, I got that wrong. I'm sorry. The word and with the comma is struck out.

Period is put in its place. Lowercase I is struck out. Uppercase I is bolded and underlined which means that what is intended is there's a period afterward seclusion and then an uppercase if none used comma explain why groovy that's fine that's that sounds that sounds great everybody got that but I just had a moment where my brain was imploding this is a good opportunity for me to praise Jenny McNis for all of her endless work and doing all this striking out an underlying Yes, Jenny, this is just a moment where you remember the flowers that I brought you uh with the other other ways that I annoy you. Um, just remember those. Uh, anything else?

Okay, we have a motion on the floor. All those in favor? None opposed.

Thank you so much.

Erica, did you get the motion and the second? Thank you.

Um, okay. No un unfinished business tonight. New business. Um, so let's get a motion on the floor. Uh, do I have a motion for consideration and approval to expend up to $55,000 from capital reserves for the building automation system upgrades at Durham Community School.

Kelly Valerie.

And I will ask Kelly if she could speak to these. That would be great.

Sure. I briefly mentioned this in my uh first presentation this evening. Um, Director Reynolds was contacted by Main Controls, who is the company that um, handles our uh, building m uh, automation maintenance contract. And um, he was notified that the um, and I'm going to read the part an excerpt from the email.

The current building automation platform is failing which is causing control issues within the building.

the uh plat he's referring to the platform it is no longer supported by the manufacturer and so this proposal in that's where the email the piece of I'm pulling out of the email ends um what I wanted to mention is that in within phase two of the energy audit um that was presented um initially as as like the four phases the four phased project um phase is two.

So this year we did the middle school and the high school with building automation.

Durham Community School was scheduled for the second phase of the energy audit. So this was identified that it was a need. We had hoped it would last till phase two, but what we've discovered is that it is not going to last um until we can complete phase two.

Um, so what we're asking for here is to um accelerate them and actually get that project done this year and utilize capital reserve money versus having it run through the energy audit.

And my understanding is that this automation system runs the heating and ventilation. And it's it does since it's malfunctioning that what's currently happening is well typically it's taking the temperature in the room and then adjusting it and you're able to adjust it remotely.

Correct.

Correct. And so now we don't know the temperature in the room unless someone goes there and checks it and if it gets too hot or too cold like we'd have to send a staff member there to check it or manually adjust it. Correct. And so it's it's a problem.

Yes.

That would need to be fixed sooner rather than later.

And so because this the reserve monies live outside of the budget that we are approved to expend from um this year, not next year, not next year hopefully.

Um we are coming to you to uh request permission to expend those funds out of the capital reserve fund.

Any questions? Oh, Chris. Um, is it the same amount as was originally scheduled for it or is it a different amount? Um, so I think we built in a slight escalator because we didn't know whether or not um um so I can tell you originally the um it was kind of three parts within the um it was 26,72 91 9,146 and then 12,285.

Um very small escalator built in. Um, but we have not had a chance to seek a proposal for what the actual replacement cost was. So, we utilized what was in phase two and and put a small buffer on it. And this is an up to number, right? So, if it goes over that, you'll see us again, right? It's a good idea to have that buffer.

Okay. Thank you, Kelly. Any other questions? Um, okay. We have a motion on the floor.

All those in favor? None opposed?

Thank you. And and more. Can I just point out if you all look at the beautiful ceiling above us, this was part of energy audit phase one?

Wonderful. Great. Very nice.

Could the Could the camera pan up to the ceiling? Is that is that something we can do? Yeah. Pan up there. No, don't do that.

Thanks, Kelly. Um, okay. Okay, we have no personnel items. We're at our second public comment period. Oh, Chris, um, can I make a comment that probably should have been in section 10 for comments?

Sure, I'll just um I sent an email to the board today just just asking kind of if anybody had any thoughts on seeing how it would be both appropriate and uh possible to provide any additional resources to people who are losing SNAP benefits in November. Um, main goal is to keep our kids and their families fed. Uh, and we talked about a little bit in the finance committee, but if if anybody else on the board has any other kind of thoughts or ideas, I mean, my my thought is it could be as simple as a reminder email to the entire school of where those resources currently exist.

um because at the time that those resources are kind of lost, you can you can be a little overwhelmed. Um it could also be much more extensive than that.

So So like the backpack backpack program that's available to the community, the food pantry correct resources. And I know some of those are state and federal dollars, which is difficult, but um if anybody had any thoughts or ideas on how we could do that with what we have, I know in the past, and I'm sure you've all gotten flyers home in your folders, so I think we'll let um look to Tom if the schools would want to do that.

Kelly, did you No, I I I think that's a great idea. Um a good place to start. And I just wanted to add that if we did go that direction and and send out an email like that. Um I I heard from uh our senator Maddie Dorey and our uh state representative Melanie Saxs and they are on this they're thinking about this a lot at the state level. But one of the things that they did mention is that they highly encouraged communities to please support our local food pantries. And so that might be something that we would want to include in such a communication.

Thanks, Kelly. Colin.

Yeah. And I just I think um I think I'm not sure to what degree we currently coordinate with Freeport Community Services um as as one possible route for um serving those families. But I would say that um I think before we send out an email to our to our community, I think talking to Freeport Community Services and maybe talking to um um maybe other folks in panel and Durham uh government or sort of equivalent um entities to sort of like have a coordinated effort around that.

Um I think that would serve everybody um better. And thank Chris for bringing that up again. And you said Durham, right, Colin? Because FCS only services Freeport and Panel, so it would be Yeah. Sorry. Sorry. Yes, that's what I meant.

Oh, I thought you did, but it would be You got You got You got Okay. Yep. I think that'd be great. Um Okay. Uh I would take a motion to adjurnn. Um Steph and I'll second. Thank you all.

Thank you.

============================================================

RSU5 BOARD OF DIRECTORS MEETING TRANSCRIPT
Meeting Date: November 05, 2025
Source File: transcript_2025-11-05_lorIdPQ-IvY.txt
District: Regional School Unit 5 (Freeport, Durham, Pownal, Maine)
============================================================

for which it stands, one nation under God, indivisible, with liberty and justice for all.

Okay, before we jump into the agenda items, we do have a few new members uh joining us this evening and some returning members. So, we'll go through those real quick. So, Valerie and Kelly and Anna, who is not here this evening, were all reelected yesterday. Congratulations. And Karen is our newest board member. Welcome. Congratulations to you as well.

And then we also have our new uh student rep, Maria Abidamarco. So, welcome to you, Maria. All right.

So, I would take a motion for consideration and approval of the minutes from the October 22nd meeting as presented, barring any errors or omissions.

Thank you, Valerie and Malik. All those in favor? Great. None opposed.

Uh adjustments to the agenda? None.

Wonderful. So, we will move on to good news and recognition. We're going to throw Maria right in and uh throw it over to you.

All right. So, is my mic on?

Okay. Just wanted to double check. All right. So, the updates are we have a field trip on November 18th to St.

Joseph's College. This field trip is for people that are interested in business, finance, and accounting. Um, the other update is that we have main medical mentor workshop on November 5th during the school day. It is from 9:05 to 10:30. This will be answering questions about the medical field as well as the schooling for that. For our performing arts department, we have something rotten available to see. We saw the preview during advisory. It was really good, very funny. Recommend seeing it.

The showings are Friday, Saturday, and Sunday. students and their mentees went trick-or-treating around the school. And congratulations to the ELA department for winning best costume. Um, and all advisories have participated in anti-bullying activities the month of October. And some good recognition to the course and band students that have qualified for district 3 honors music festival. Um, this will be hosted in January. Me and Moon will be sharing information about the pressing issues at Freeport High School with the board such as the cell phone policy, building a culture of respect and belonging, addressing incidents of hate speech and bullying, working with food services to make the cafeteria greener, and supporting transitions from middle school to high school, and other topics.

That's a lot going on. Thank you.

And right now, it was supposed to be the regional finals for the field hockey team. They were supposed to be starting well I guess not quite yet 7:30 but that got postponed due to weather. So and also congratulations to the girls cross country team that were won state championship this weekend. So wonderful things going on all over the place and I'm looking forward to the play. So this Friday, Saturday, Sunday, right?

Wonderful. Great. Thank you for that.

All right. So we will move on to public comment. Uh if we have folks that are looking to speak, we ask you to come up to the microphone, give us the name, your town, uh and three minutes on the clock.

I'll find my name later. Um well, for the the new people on the board and student reps, uh my name is Annie Wear and I'm representing the RSU 5 Alliance for Thoughtful Technology.

were an organization that started about a year and a half ago, kind of brought forth by the book The Anxious Generation, which talks about cell phones, not just in our kids' lives, but all of our lives and how we use them.

Um, and that is sort of morphed into just technology in general. And we use the word thoughtful technology. I know it's a lot to say, but we use the word thoughtful technology because we don't want to be seen as anti-technology, but just we bring technology into our kids' lives with purpose that's data driven and supported with evidence. So, I'm responding to the last meeting. I don't know where you guys are at in the intervening four weeks if you guys have had conversations and talked with one another, done your own due diligence, but what I'm about to say comes from my response to that. Um, and so I appreciated uh the superintendent at the very end of the meeting talking about the addictive quality of these things for all of us. Um, and so we have to ask ourselves, are smartphones addictive? Do they impact student achievement? Do they impact student mental health? If you answered yes to just one of them, we need to change what we're doing. It's wrong. And our standard of care is better than that. All right. So, having said that, we also need to act swiftly.

The MSMA, uh, I think the stud is going to come out this coming week. Um, but they put out a survey to all districts in Maine. 70 responded. close to 90% of them are already either enacting a all day ban or they're working towards it and they're starting the policy process.

So where we're at, we're a little bit behind the eightball compared to what's happening in our state.

Um I want to respond to a comment made last meeting. I think it was from the student rep who basically said, "A lot of us are able to manage our phones, so why are you punishing us?" And I really strongly encourage the board not to look at this as punishment, but rather we are looking at our students well-being, right? We don't take cigarettes away from kids because we're punishing them.

It's in their well-being that they don't have them. But what if I can manage mine? I'm not I don't need to take it out when other kids do. And I give you this quick analogy of a friend of mine whose husband is an alcoholic. She's not. she can have alcohol in her house, right? But he can't. And so guess what?

They don't. And so I bring that up only as because sometimes we reduce access not because everyone struggles, but because if enough people do, it's our responsibility as a community to help everyone.

Um, at the last meeting, the high school, I think Jen spoke about strengthening executive function. And nothing roads executive function faster than constant distraction and the dopamine cycle of smartphones. It's just a fact. If we're serious about building skills, these devices have to stay out of these kids' hands the whole day. If we're talking about improving test scores because Maine's taken a huge dive, there's no arguing with that.

This can help. This is like tenfold and it helps everybody. I know you're looking at your watch and I'm almost done. So, what pouches, right? People have talked about them. I understand that pouches cost money, right? Um, our particular group, we can't fund raise and collect money, but we can help fund raise. We can help you guys fund raise if you need to. Got to tell you though, it's a lot of brownies at the bake sale to buy these pouches, right? And I feel like there's this is the one single thing that can help every single student in our building achieve academic success, executive function, increase sociability.

And I feel that it is in our best interest, our standard of care that we take on the responsibility that we've been given and and help our students.

And I think this is the single greatest thing that we can do. And if you talk to any administrator or teacher that is already doing this and has done this, they will tell you it is the most impactful policy that they have implemented in their entire careers. And I'm believe I'm quoting that's a direct quote from the principal up at Morse High School. Thank you. Thank you, Annie.

Hi, good evening everyone. My name is Kelly Delaney and I'm a short free report parent. Um, I just want to thank you for uh giving us an opportunity to speak to this topic. I want to offer my full support behind a bell-to-bell band here at our at RSU5. I'm a parent of two high school and one elementary student in the district. I also attended the last meeting and feel we know so much about the negative impact of phones in the school and I hope this collective moves quickly and decisively to make healthy choices for our youth. Thank you. Thank you.

Just in case someone's around the corner, do we have anyone else for public comment? Okay, wonderful. Thank you. All right.

So, we will move on to item eight on our agenda report from the superintendent.

Good evening everyone. Uh before I launch into my formal report, I wanted to respond to a request for information from one of the members of the board and that's Danielle. You had sent an email asking about vacancies. So, I have that information. At the moment, we have 5.5 specialed edtech positions vacant. Three of them are at Moore Street School. 1.5 are here at Freeport High School and one is at Freeport Middle School. We also have 2.5 custodian positions or I should say two of them are custodians which means combination of custodian and bus driver and a.5 custodian position open.

We also have a few specialist positions um that we have had to fill with contracted services people. Uh that includes a teacher of the deaf for five hours a week. Um a speech language pathologist for 30 hours a week and a onetoone nurse that a student requires.

You're welcome. So now to my report. Um I want to confine my remarks tonight to three major topics that have been ongoing themes for me.

One is early childhood. Second is strategic planning and then finally the budget. So first about early childhood.

Last week we had the first meeting of our early childhood task force. Several board members here were in attendance.

Um the focus of that meeting is just was just to help everyone understand the mandate that the state has placed upon us to assume responsibility for childf find and providing free appropriate public education to 3 to 5 year olds uh at the by July 2028 at the latest.

Um it takes a while to just explain what the mandate is and folk not everybody in the room had even a rudimentary understanding of that. So we also looked at the strengths that we already have in place that we can build upon to help meet the need. Um I think the foremost among those is that we have a very strong early intervention team. Um that team consists of an occupational therapist, a speech language pathologist and an early childhood special educator.

And these folks screen every preK student that comes into the three elementary schools where we have prek.

and they support those students through consultations, small groups and direct services if needed. Excuse me. Um, one of the strengths pursu pursuant to that also is that all of the children who are already in our prek programs are being served by our staff, those who have IEPs. So that that's a strength to build upon. Um each of those specialists bring something very essential to the table and we will be continuing to rely on their expertise to help us go forward. Um it just means that we're not starting completely from square one. Um we have other issues to think about. We have to think about when we step into the work and how that can intersect with funding that the state is offering. Um we have to think about how we can figure the programs we already have to best meet the need. So there's lots of thinking to do, but our hope is that by January, that task force will have a really good grasp of the the need that we have and through bringing multiple perspectives to the table, we'll be able to offer you some options to choose in terms of how we go forward.

Uh my second update is about strategic planning. So as you know, we are in the middle of the strategic planning process. We are very close to the end of a major phase of that which is developing a portrait of the graduate.

Our hope is to have a portrait of a graduate to bring to you by December to showcase to you and the portrait of the graduate is really the end point from which we make decisions that about action steps that go into the strategic plan. I can also tell you that after we develop that portrait of the graduate based on all kinds of community input, our next steps are to develop a mission statement and core values and beliefs.

So after that, we then get into the finer points of what are the action steps in our plan um that will guide us into the future. So that's a rough um broad brush stroke of the work in the months that are ahead. And finally, the budget. So, um, earlier this fall, I took a new approach to gathering staff input and had listening sessions in all the schools. Um, and I also sent out an individual staff survey to gather their perspectives about budget priorities.

So, over the last few weeks, the administrative team has been able to review the data that came in from the staff. Um, we have been digging into that feedback. We've identified themes that emerge. Um, importantly, we've been able to look at the very significant degree of overlap between um themes that emerge in the staff feedback and themes that emerge when the administrators themselves consider the same budget questions. So, that's a strength. Um the next step that we have that we're engaged in and we started work on this morning in a meeting is to define what our district-wide priorities would be that we would shape the budget around.

Um we have not finalized that but we we spent a lot of time and discussion about it today. Examples of what I mean would be things like access to professional development or reasonable class sizes or making sure that resources for kids with special needs are sufficient, etc., etc. We want to be able to use criteria like that when it gets down to nitty-gritty decisions about the budget to make sure that they are in line and consistent with the priorities that we all establish.

Um, as I have mentioned before, we will have a uh special board workshop about the budget at 5:00 pm on November 19th.

That'll be at Durham Community School.

This is right before the regularly scheduled board meeting that will be at 6:30, also at Durham Community School.

And at that workshop, I will share um concrete information about the context of next year's budget. and I will ask you for your guidance about where we can go forward so that we all have clarity and purpose in that work. Um, and that's my update for tonight. We have a lot of work ahead, especially on these three topics that I keep bringing up, but they're big topics and they require a lot of forethought. So, thank you for hearing me out. One last thing, um, not to skip to the next thing on the agenda because that's really Michelle's thing to do, but I just want to point out that, um, we have a retirement to announce. And can I just go ahead?

Yeah. Yeah. So, Bertha Hilton, who is the dearly beloved kitchen manager at Freeport Middle School, has announced her retirement at the end of this year.

And I would like to uh make sure everybody knows that I have written an article for the forecaster that futures Bertha and I just submitted it today and it's already on our website and anyway just I want people to read it because Bertha is a gem and she will be missed.

I already read it. It was lovely.

Did you want to do the support staff hire?

Well, sure. Um I generally don't intervene when you're just doing your stuff. feel free to I mean I don't want to stay in my lane.

Um we have hired a uh more street excuse me more street school kitchen manager and that is Linda Duplexi.

Thank you. Um one question on the strategic plan. Can you remind us or me if everyone else remembers uh when is the next time the board will see like do we do we see sort of that um vision statement piece before the action steps start getting worked on to weigh in or Okay.

Yes, you will. And we had some discussion at the last strategic plan meeting and and other folks who were here at the table were part of that discussion about at what point does the board actually weigh in to shape those. Um I think that's an ongoing discussion.

With regard to the portrait of the graduate, that piece is really based on all the community feedback and we want to make sure that the community's role in the process is honored. So at further stages in the process, the board is a more active participant.

Thank you.

All right. Any other questions on the superintendent update?

All right, we will keep moving. Uh item nine, administrator reports. We will continue on with our department reviews and goal updates and we will start with transportation. and Jeremy.

Good evening everyone.

The transportation goals for 2425 last year were disposal of vehicles no longer adequate for inclusion in the fleet. The follow procedures outlined in the policy DN school property disposition. We disposed the two buses, a van and a truck.

We developed a timeline for replacement of vehicles based on the evaluation of the fleet. Developed comprehens comprehensive timeline for replacement of all vehicles. I'm in constant collaboration with the director of finance to maintain fleet replacement times.

Increase recruitment and retention of drivers. Attend job fairs, district hiring fair, recruit new drivers, collaborate with human services uh human resource coordinator to strategize advertisement methods. Uh we added district cancelled the summer job fair but we did advertise and hired a new driver.

The 2526 goals is expansion of safety training and activities. Develop a new safety and training schedule for all transportation staff.

Develop a system for fleet maintenance.

Update a plan for recording the maintenance and repairs of the fleet.

Exploration of most of the most effective way to schedule van bus usage for extra clerical activities. Field trip requests. Research and explore pros and cons of different methods of scheduling to meet the demands of van and bus usage.

Danielle, thank you Jeremy for your update. I was wondering have we had to cancel any event like not be able to provide? I didn't think so. We have not. That's a goal of mine also is not to have to cancel anything roots or extracurricular.

I know you do a very good job at that. So, thank you.

Jeremy has done a fantastic job u managing about a jillion things. Um so, you have a lot of gratitude from me. Thank you. It's a juggling act.

Um, I was curious about, um, because I feel like we had heard about there was a state program that we could use to like help with the the rooting and and that kind of stuff that that didn't cost the district anything. Did we I feel like this was probably last year that I remember that. Did we end up using that or did it not be We used a little bit of it traverser.

Oh, right. Yep.

It ended up pretty being pretty vague and we ended up just going with our own. Okay.

Way we did it last time and y as far as I know first day of school went off with a bang and we didn't have any phone calls and we've done fine.

There were no kindergarten parents looking for their kids. So it's always a win on the first day of school. Extremely big win.

And so two custodians are in the current openings. Is that is that I mean that feels like that's pretty good for where we have been, right?

It is. Okay.

We're down three drivers though in each town we've combined. So Oh, we're good. I mean, this was a while ago, but yeah.

Uh and then the the summer job fair that we canled was was was it scheduling or did we not think we were going to I'm not actually sure on that.

I think it just became largely mo of all of our um teaching staff positions were open. Um and last year when we had because we we had set it in July um at our admin retreat the year before. Um, and then we and then that August we actually had a hiring fair and we had like two people show up to it and so we didn't actually like proceed with it. We didn't see that that there was that much of a demand for it at that time.

And it wasn't specific to drivers. It was all of our openings was the correct was the fair. Okay. Correct.

Thank you. That's and we were largely just down to drivers and ed and the edtech positions that are still open now. Yeah.

Kelly.

Yeah. Excuse me. Do you know how we're doing comparing to comparing with other districts? I mean, I know this is a problem for everybody, but um I'm just kind of curious if we know what other people are are doing to try to solve this problem and if it's something we can pursue. Also, there are we are doing well as far as what I'm hearing from cancelling routes and trips in other districts. Um, we're advertising daily, Facebook, all over the place, trying to get drivers to come. We're trying, but as I said, I think we're doing well compared to other districts. Other questions for Jeremy?

Thank you. Thank you. Have a good night.

All right. So, next up is uh Glenn Reynolds and our update on facilities.

Evening everyone. Think I'm going to lower this down just a little bit. So, the uh facility goals for 24 and 25. Uh the school goal is to ensure for both constant is to ensure all facilities are operating efficiently and effectively.

Uh we developed an articulate articulated capital improvement plan that includes items identified through the energy audit and a comprehensive building assessment. Uh developed a strategic plan outlined uh through financial investment and infrastructure and physical assets. Uh we also de developed an articulated plan for vehicle and equipment replacement. Uh we developed a strategy for systematically replacing assets based on object objective criteria not just when they uh fail. Um by determining the optimum time to retire a piece of asset or replace an asset by reducing operational risk minimize minimizing cost and maximizing asset performance.

So uh for the facility goals for 2526 are continuation of the uh development of an articulated capital improvement plan that includes items from the energy audit and uh comprehensive building assessment. So as we continue along and we move through the potential phases two, three, and four, um as things come up, things fail, we'll continue to juggle things around to to address those issues. Same thing with the uh vehicle replacement as uh an equipment replacement. At things fail, we'll we'll move things around to replace those as well. Um also we're looking at uh doing a facility assessment for early childhood transition. So what we're looking at is putting a proposal together to bring a third-party group to come in to assess our buildings facility-wise. They'll come in, take a look at the entire building, look at the HVAC, they'll work at look at the playground to make sure that we meet the needs for the early childhood development and also building mapping.

Now, I'm going to wait for Michelle to ask me what is building mapping?

[Laughter] So building mapping is is a process of creating detailed and accurate digital representation of a building physical space features and surrounding contexts using various data collection technologies. So this process serves two primary applications construction and facility management and architectural pro uh projection displays. So, this will also assist us in the uh facility assessment part while we're looking at overall buildings, but this also can be an asset to our first responders because they can also have access to this. So, given at any time there's whatever the incident may be, they'll have access to our layout, say here at the high school, be able to pull up that map and be able to put an articulate plan together depending on what that needs is. So, it serves as a multi-use for our facilities.

That's our goals.

So, I want to start and this is this is really for all three of you, Glenn, Kelly, and Jeremy. um the the the huge step forward that I think this district took last year through that phased approach of both the vehicle replacement and the building plans and you know the how we're going to how we're going to get all of these updates um both sustainability as well as life safety.

Um that was a huge lift and it was something that um I think the three of you did an absolutely incredible job. um not only figuring out what needed to be done, but being able to put it in a a plan that the board could first understand and to get behind. So, um huge thanks to all of you guys for that.

Um I I think it was um in terms of of facilities and transportation goals over the last several years. I think that just knocked it out of the park. Like we haven't seen progress like that in forever. So, wow. Really, really well done. Um, and so I'm going to ask another question about building mapping. Absolutely. You knew I would. I did.

Um, so is that like is that software or what? Okay.

It's it's a group coming in taking a complete look at our at our buildings uh putting that uh collecting all that data putting it into a software program. So then you can look at a three-dimensional of our buildings bird's eye view if you want it or what have you and it'll show the detailed HVAC classrooms or what have you. So it'll give us a ton of data. We can use that for pretty much whatever we need to use it for.

Yeah. Okay.

Y and then the early childhood transition.

So that is that's different than this the DOE coming in and doing an assessment of our space.

When the DOE came in, they looked specifically at the rooms where we have prek right now. and they looked a lot at the equipment in those rooms to try to determine what they could give us if we joined cohort three. Um they did not so much look at long-term what if we added this, what if we added that and where it could fit in relation to our entire phys every physical plant we have. So that's more what Gwen's talking about.

Correct. And uh if we were to potentially join one of these cohorts, would they fund such a study?

Um answer that.

Yes. Uh I would not say that they would. Okay.

You're kind of leading to my next question. Can How much does some of this stuff cost?

Can you give like a I I don't I don't have that information right yet. I'm only in conversations with them. We need to schedule the time to have them come in and lay out a plan or what it would cost. And I'm sure there's different levels. If you just want the bird's eye view or if you want the the Cadillac, what have you. Uh once I get that information, I'll certainly continue to share that.

One of the points that we may want to consider, this was something that was raised in our admin discussion today about the budget. Um, one of the themes that we are going to continue to work on in presenting a budget to you is long an eye toward long-term sustainability versus just short-term getting through this next year. And toward that end, we should be looking at the needs that we will have going out a number of years and the facilities that we have and how we can configure things in the most cost-effective way and the way that actually meets student needs the best. And to do that, we really need a good starting place, a a really comprehensive understanding of our facilities and how that intersects with student learning, the cost that we spend per student on different facilities, etc., etc. So, a study like that is something that can be useful in many dimensions.

are three and four together the early assessment are they are they using this mapping thing to try and find space for initially no so when when I talked with Tom about it they were separate items but because of you know looking into them they can be used together so and I think they they fit perfectly to what Tom was talking about the long-term plan this will give us an opportunity to be able to look at from a bird's eye view at the high school how can we use that better along with the outside or the third party coming in to tell us what options that we may or may not have. But I I so I think they flow very well together. Other questions for Glenn?

Feel like we're letting you off easy, but okay. Thank you very much. Thank you, Glenn.

We're saving all our questions for Emily. Mass Landing School.

Good evening. Um, I was thinking about being here a year ago and uh, I had shared that we were working on chronic absenteeism and working really hard to have our students in the building as much as possible and I think that number this time last year was 6.3 and that felt amazing. Um, so you can imagine our excitement at the end of the year when um, we landed at 3.65% um, for chronic absenteeism.

This number means so much to us um as a whole school community in part because I think it is really reflective of our community as a whole, every single adult who interacts with kids. Um we got an email maybe two weeks ago from the executive director of CountMe In which is a prominent organization in Maine that partners with schools that experience chronic absenteeism. and she had actually gone through the state dashboard to identify the schools that had demonstrated the greatest improvements and reached out to us just to personally say, "Nice work and can I pick your brain on what you're doing?" And so Scott Emory, our assistant principal, and I got on the phone with her last week and she just underscored what I believe, which is fundamentally if you're going to solve um the issue of chronic absenteeism, if you're working to get kids in the building every day, school has to be a place kids want to be and a place of connection and belonging.

you can't um put you can't just problem solve it on the back end when kids aren't showing up. In other words, you can't just like intervention your way out of this challenge. Um and that culture and climate's at the foundation of having students who come to school.

And so, um when I share that number, it really reflects the work our teachers have done, the work we've done as a system, thinking about really critical parts of the development of eight, nine, 10, and 11 year olds. things like Daily Mile, um things like building kids ability to social problem solve, which we know is just like at the heart of that age group that they're social problems that come up. Starting our day with morning meeting, having choice embedded in academics, um having strong relationships. Last year we started third and fifth grade buddies, which has been like a great point of connection for kids. Um and so when you see that number, it really is a reflection of all of those pieces we've done at Tier 1 um for all kids. Um, we also did a lot last year to to to support those families um and students who were struggling with daily attendance as well. And Scott Emmery, our assistant principal, was just instrumental in ensuring we could be consistent. So, for example, um any student who was on our watch list based on our attendance team, if if that student isn't there, they get a call, the family gets a call that morning from um typically Scott personally, if not um me or a school nurse. Um, so families know like we notice when your kids aren't here. When kids come back, they're seen and welcomed back. When families need additional support, we're having those meetings, um, which Scott is facilitating to to put in specific plans, um, when students need it. And, um, also really working to ensure classroom communities are positive places. And that means when kids are having a tricky time that we have staff um who are available to support them and follow up both to help skill build for the child who's having a challenging time who might be disregulated or making a choice that's interfering with the learning of other kids. Um so we're working on that skill building piece as you um have seen through our goal pres uh goal sheet with some of the work at the RTIB level. Um but also that work is critical to creating a great learning environment um for all kids independent of whether they need that targeted support or not. So um last year really was the pieces we were working on really interconnected chronic absenteeism RTI um but those pieces support one another because we know when school and classrooms are a positive place then um kids are there. So, we're really excited and proud of the work that was done last year and as you'll see in our goals for the year ahead. The hope is to s sustain that work. Um, those numbers uh are the lowest uh I mean they're they're below prepandemic levels. Um even years ago when it wasn't even an area of focus, typically numbers were between five and 7%. So, we were thrilled to see something below five. I pulled the data last night. We were we're at 6.05% 05% um as of last night. Um which still puts us below where we were this year last time. Um this time of year it's like if you have a student who took a oneweek vacation, they're chronically absent because we've only been in school for 46 days. So um we're going to continue doing the work we did last year as well as we made some small refinements to our um attendance process and the way we progress monitor students attendance and um proactively and responsively communicate with families. and those were reflections that came at the end of last year. And so those are some changes um that are being implemented this year as well. Another piece of continued work is uh the RTIB supports that we've been refining over the last year and two months. So we have um an RTIB edtech as well as a classroom that we call the sale classroom and it's really a regulation a self-regulation space for students. So students access it for a variety of reasons. We have students who have planned breaks in that space. Um might receive reinforcement. So they might earn time with a trusted adult. Uh they also might access that space and unplanned times if something's difficult. Uh students have specific tools they access in that space. And it's really about skill building. So learning to use those self-regulation strategies so when they encounter a challenge which which is inevitable that they will have uh those tools. and uh Scott Emory partners closely with our edtech to support uh that space and the the creation of that space which was really built off um the model the bridges model in Durham has been a very positive shift whereas we had that edtech position for many years having a um defined space for it allows it to be much more predictable for students and consistent for students when students need that support. And then obviously the goal is to get those kids regulated and back into classrooms so they can fully access their learning as well.

You'll see the third piece um of work that we're deeply focused on this year is regard uh related to the teaching of reading. So at the 35 grad span in the district, we've adopted revised units.

uh they're they're similar in many ways to the existing reading units that we had in place with some revisions in response to feedback as well as research on the teaching of reading. And so there are some new components for example a vocabulary component um and at the third grade of phonics and morphology component that is really an outgrowth of changes that were implemented at the K2 span over the past several years. Uh what we were really excited to see this fall, which I didn't anticipate actually when we drafted the goals, is um our third graders this year are the first cohort that had those refinements K12 and the their data is as strong as any data set that I've seen in the district in my 12 years in the district that the those changes that have been implemented K12 um clearly are impacting student learning and then those third grade revisions build upon those. So, for example, the first two phonics units of this year are some review of second grade phonics and then it transitions into things like prefixes and suffixes.

Um, and that's what all students um will get in addition to the implementation of those new units. What we're really trying to do is not not focus on on it as a curriculum adoption as much as an opportunity to deepen our practices and knowledge of how you teach reading effectively. And so, um, we've been using some of our professional learning time to dig into what does it look like to teach reading at the 3 through five span. Well, for example, on the October 10th PLLD, um, because all students right now are launching informational units, we did some collective learning around what does strong informational reading look like? How do we use text sets to support that? How do you build background knowledge? So, students essentially have have something to kind of velcro their reading to. um and all these elements that support strong reading uh at the 35 span. The other thing we're doing is linking that strongly to standards. And that was feedback we got actually from teachers last year is this desire to more deeply understand the standards at their grade span. So when they're teaching a unit, they're not thinking just about what is this unit teaching, but what are the key priorities and goals we want students to have at the end of the school year. So that will be a big focus for our professional learning for the year.

You'll also see that one of the ways we decided as a school in addition to the metrics, the benchmark assessment system as well as um the NWA that we have to assess progress is also doing a reading inventory of our students. Kind of the question we grappled with is like what is important to us to know about our readers in addition to their things like fluency and comprehension. Um, and we just feel strongly that our students should have identity as identities as readers and connect with being a reader long term. This isn't about being a fourth grade reader, but about about being a life reader. And so, as part of that, we just finalized um the kind of reading survey we'll be giving students.

And then um last Friday on Halloween did our first kind of monthly reading celebration which um was the first time we had done it but was one of my favorite ways we spent Halloween which is we did a spooky reading celebration and students could bring in blankets and we turned off the lights they brought in flashlights. We played spooky background music and students read in their blanket forts um as well as read aloud to each other and it was magic. Um Tracy Trembley, one of our fifth grade teachers, emailed me today and she was like, "Emily, I just want you to know that my fifth grade class just earned um a reward and they voted to have another reading tent celebration." So it I think it you know it speaks both to the work we want to do around reading and having a love of reading, but I also think it connects back when we think of attendance and kids wanting to be at school is thinking about what are the ways we make school a place that speaks to kids that they have a sense of belonging. they have a sense of joy that we can wear our jammies and crawl under some tables with some blankets um and enjoy books together as well as really deepen our skills as practitioners in the practice of reading to support them and their growth. So that's our year ahead questions.

Can the board come to the next pajama reading day? I can let you know.

Yeah.

The onesies, Tom, are really popular right now. Like the full jammy onesies. So, it's got to be K-pop demon hunters, though, right?

Roomie questions for Emily. Valerie.

First, I want to say as a parent of an MLS student, um, she's had two Fort sessions this year so far. Very excited.

We've already been doing that at our house. So to have it at school is an extra treat. She brings three bags now instead of just one on those days.

Um I'm just interested. I understand this is mostly reading focused. What What are we doing for math and science? Anything specific?

Yeah, so a couple things and I thanks for pointing out that like just because this is what's on a piece of paper, there are lots of other things happening. So for science last year all grade levels launched uh the first open SCIAD unit um at Mass Landing School.

Other schools launched the previous year. So other schools are in different places with it. Um and grade levels have the option to do a second this year. I think it's to be determined um which grade levels choose what. What's been really interesting and to me is powerful about having done something once is what grade levels now are doing is a more kind of thoughtful implementation of that. So, for example, our fifth graders do an eco are doing an ecosystems unit right now that's aligned to nextgen standards. Last year, they had these like nurse log kits that actually were mailed. So, you can imagine like we got literally these boxes that showed up that said live animals and had crickets in them. Um, and this year the teachers have been thoughtful about like what does it look like? Actually, we're adjacent to woods. Let's go out into the woods and have students do this and observe um the the ecosystem over time.

I happened to walk down the path the other day when fifth graders were coming up and I was like, "Talk to me about what you said." And the student was like, "There was steam." And I was like, "Talk to me about like what's your hypothesis about this?" And they're like, "Oh, it was spores coming off a mushroom that were blowing in the wind." And I dug, you know, the student kind of dug down into log and was finding millipedes. Um, and students are, you know, fifth grade other students are growing mold right now and exploring what conditions making hypotheses about the conditions that mold is best going to grow in, which is like come visit our classrooms and see our mold spores. Um so teachers are being thoughtful about that and creating more interdisciplinary opportunities. So for example in third grade which is wrapping up a weather unit they did an integration with STEM and students in STEM then based on what they had learned about how different cultures build structures to um meet certain functions of different climates.

then they in STEM created structures using those properties to look at different variables like wind. So I think the the beauty of being in year 2 is it gives more people can kind of envision now and be more thoughtful about cross-disciplinary opportunities.

Um in math we as you know we're or as you may know we're in a district in the process of doing district level curriculum review. So, we're we've been kind of thoughtful about not necessarily like layering on new elements, but using the formative data that we have to be thoughtful about how we're supporting um math learners as well.

Thank you.

I just want to say I am always so impressed whenever I hear your your reports and I just really appreciate how um holistic and relational your approach always is to basically any problem that you that you address and you clearly it worked really well with um the uh absenteeism and I I can see it's also working really well with your curriculum and reading too and I just with my own kids I really appreciated that approach.

So I I know that that is why Mass landing is doing really well because of that relational joyful culture that you're creating in the school. So thank you.

Yeah, as you were as you were talking through the absentee piece from last year and the results um the incredible results that you attained. I mean I don't know there's sort of the you know the natural rate of unemployment in the world, right? Like it never goes below a certain percent like 3.65 65 seems really low, right?

Yeah. And we're not like in clarity, we are not trying to get low. Like there are students for unique students with complex medical needs like Right. The goal is not zero.

Yeah. Okay. But I mean that number is just impressive. I mean when I I love to see the the the time the the trend um and from 17.62 to 3.65 in in three years is is pretty uh pretty incredible. And one of the things you mentioned that kind of resonated with me was like making it a joyful place to be and not just dealing with what do we do when they don't show up. And the other piece that jumped out to me was 16 opportunities for parents and caregivers to attend parenting groups. Um, to me, I don't know. I I'm going to hypothesize that those types of connections that you're not only building with the kids, but with the parents, I think those all add to the to the success of the Mass Landing School. And um, I just wanted to say thank you.

Thanks. And I think it is it it Thank you for pointing out that it's multi-year work is that like this work like meaningful work is multi-year work, right? And it's all of these, you know, if somebody said like, "What's the piece?" It's like there it's it isn't a piece. It's the collection of those pieces and having the space and the time, right, to look to kind of like fine-tune each of those pieces. Um because it's the collective whole care, it also sounds like it was a really good investment to hire an assistant principal to help with that part as well. Yeah, I think I think what Scott and that role have really provided um at the very foundation is consistency on so many levels, right? Consistency.

You know, last year we had a student who every day was coming in, he would have a checkbox in Scott's office and if he came to school all week, he played basketball with Scott on Friday, right?

And the student would come in and like high-five and mark the checkbox. So, it's like consistency at that level.

It's consistency for teachers that know if a student is having a challenge that somebody is able to respond. I can't tell you that the number of times this week I've been in meetings where my radio has gone off and I knew that somebody was able to go support it.

Right? So it means like when parents come in and meet with me, I don't get interrupted in meetings or teachers don't have a student in their classroom who really can't be successful in that moment. Um and so that ability to respond and that also benefits all kids, right? So it's it's like all of these pieces, but having that capacity in the role has enabled a level of consistency that was not possible prior to that.

Uh I was at a a birth to early childhood conference recently and met some folks from the main engagement and attendance center from the DOE and shared a little bit about how well we're doing. I know panel is also knocking it out of the park, I believe, with attendance and they would really love to hear from you and hear what you're doing to be able to share that with other schools. Yeah, we had a team from RSU5 attend a state conference and I think they had everybody up and they're like, "Stand up. You know, if your chronic absenteeism is below 40, keep standing if it's below 30, keep standing if it's" and and amazingly there are districts where their chronic absenteeism 40%. I mean, it's just right. It's it's mind-blowing. Um, and finally they got down to 10 and I think four of our five administrators were still standing and Scott was like go to five, go to five and they didn't. But I think it's a testament like we are we're having a lot of success at Mass Landing. Um, I think there are other great pockets in the district and I think the other thing um is my hope is we also like some of this is about building habits early and seeing the benefit of those habits being established in elementary school as well. So I anticipate there will also be kind of some trickle up. That's my hope, right? As we look, you know, nationally, middle and high school chronic absenteeism rates are higher. The same is true of RSU5 as well.

And because I have this uh inability to remember time or it seems to go by too quickly, this is year three with the assistant principal.

Year two. Oh, it was just last year. Oh, we Okay. We added more street first and then M.

Yeah. So it's Amanda's third year and Scott second second. Okay. I had it switched to my head.

Thank you. So I'm not as crazy as I thought. Great.

Other comments? Colin's like, "Yes, you are." Um, other questions or comments for Emily?

All right. Thank you. Thanks.

Oh, sorry. Did you have one? She hasn't She hasn't left yet.

It's not super important, but I am curious since we're talking about RTIB supports. Um, you have a therapy dog in your building still this year.

Maxed.

Is and do the kids do do they relate well to him? Like does that actually kind of help you with your goals?

It you know what I will be totally transparent. I underestimated the power of having a dog in the building. I could have like taken it or left it, but I had a staff who was passionate about it. Um, for certain kids it truly makes a difference. I I was talking um to our SR recent SRO recently and I was like I have a student truly who it has kept classrooms from being destroyed. Right.

If that student is disregulated and Max is there, it is like his ability to cognitively shift with that dog is something I I do not Max has a power I do not have. Um, and I will say in fairness, the kids who requested the additional blanket reading fort when they request the fifth graders also requested that Max be part of the blanket fort. So, it is it is one of those things like does it make a difference for all kids? No. Does it make a meaningful difference for some kids? Absolutely. And is there this sense of belonging with Max?

Bizarrely, yes. I mean, if you come to Daily Mile on the day that Max is there, it's like who gets to walk Max and who gets to walk, you know, have his leash and walk with Max. And so, I think for kids, like going back to this idea of like it's a lot of things. It's not there's not a thing. It's like what is the landscape of things that create school to be a place that kids feel connection and for some kids that is a Labradoodle, right? Might not be for me, but for the kid that it is, it's awesome.

Okay, this is just a logistical question for me. What about people with allergies?

He's hypoallergenic. So, we have I mean, no dogs are fully hypoallergenic.

We We do not have any students who have allergies. Have any issue with it? Yes. Okay. That would be really sad. So sad. All the other kids.

Michelle, we actually specially bred Max to uh have absolutely zero in our STEM classes. Exactly. Haley Goodspeed here at You can touch on that next. Yeah. Next next year.

I was say I hear Tom Brady's cloning his dog, so maybe we can clone Max. Yes.

I I feel that I You don't have to put your hand up.

Well, you um I feel that I have to say just as I you know, I've been in the school quite a bit. Um I've been in all our schools quite a bit and a difference that I see here in RSU5 and this is not just me blowing sunshine, but I've been in other places where the approach to issues like attendance is consequence-based. And it comes from a belief that if we just consequence kids and families into complying, then somehow we'll get results. And you know what? They do get results, but they're not good ones. And that's not the mindset that we have here. And I my experience is that that is rare and we should really celebrate it.

You could bring Max to a board meeting. Great idea. I love it.

I have two doodles at home. Did we did have a school picture taken in a mass landing shirt, so stay tuned.

All right, at least send that to the board, please. Thank you.

All right. Thank you, Emily. See, good question. See, it was important.

All right. So, that uh finishes our administrator reports for this evening.

Uh we don't have board comments or committee reports on here. Um, I would uh I guess I'll I'll ask you guys. I know we have a few things that we want to make sure we get to. Um, interested to hear. I don't want too much time to go by after the MSMA conference for folks who attended if there was anything anybody wanted to share on any sessions. Uh, I know Cara was kind enough to share some slides from a session she went to specific to um the cell phone question on the agenda tonight, but um wasn't sure if anybody attended any attended any other sessions they would like to share any feedback on before it gets too far into the rear view. Danielle um stuff was there too, but we went to one about the presented by the Gorum um I guess there's two of them I went to. Um the Gorum School presented um how they include their community and businesses and getting kids out into the community and doing like job shadowing and things like that.

And she um she seemed the uh principal or she was the superintendent what just amazing very well put together like um I don't know like just this amazing program for kids and local businesses that was very well supported. Um, I think that would be something I think Dee Benell does a great job here, but I could see this going in. You know, we could do more and have more opportunities for kids. Um, so I think that that would be something maybe to I don't know, maybe Dee could like connect with somebody at that school or something like that to see what we could do to mimic that. And then the other one that I went to was um to learn how to um uh figure out the um the budget when it comes to the EPS.

Wow. Anyways, um it was a lot, but it was good to be able to understand that sheet I think a little bit more. It it's almost we were talking like they almost needs to be a class every year for new board members on how to go through that sheet. Um, again, she did a pretty good job. As long as she wasn't being interrupted by, you know, people asking tons of questions, you could get through it. And I feel now that I can look at the sheet and understand much more than I ever really could. So, again, something I think I don't know how we get like her slides or maybe like a way to do that so every new board member can like look at that because it's a lot.

So, yeah. And we've done it sort of at the board level. Usually it was around the cost sharing formula because really you need to have a pretty firm understanding of EPS and the ED279.

So EPS is um essential programs and services for folks who are newer. Um and that's essentially what the state uses to decide how much it costs to educate a student in your district. Um so they put some assumptions class size, school size, where you are in the state, a variety of things. Um, and so that's what the EPS formula is is like how much they say it it costs to to educate a kid. Um, and then the ED279 is the form that each district has that that says how many kids do you have? What's the EPS? What's your valuation? How much do you need to raise from taxes? All the all the the fun stuff that goes into the budget process. Um, so we have done that through the cost sharing formula to try and give everybody a baseline. But it's a really good point that as people come and go off the board, um, you know, that knowledge may or may not remain. Um, so maybe it's something we can think about from finance. Um, you know, maybe that's something we put on our finance agenda for, you know, to invite new board members once a year. You know, if you haven't been through a budget process yet, we have a, you know, a conversation about what does it look like. So, thank you for that, Valerie.

Cara and I went to a lot of the same ones, so I don't have a lot of new information to share. I did go to one about um finances as well, and it turned out it was the summary was not what I was expecting the actual um discussion to be. Um yeah, it it was about I want to say it was and I think it's near where Tom used to be.

um either Rockland or Rockport because I often get those two confused. Um the superintendent has had four different business managers in five years. Cool. Yep.

Yep. So, um and how hard it's been. So, I did want to since Kelly is here to say how thankful we are to have her. I mean, generally, but also specifically.

I'll echo that. All right, Cara.

Well, I have a lot of notes and I wasn't prepared to summarize. Don't feel like you need to. I I mean, it'll be on our next one. I just didn't want people to be like, "Oh, that was too long ago." But if you have notes and you want to do it in the next one, that's a okay.

I will maybe do more next time, but I did attend an interesting communication strategy session that I hope to that I think Stephanie you attended as well.

So, I think we'll be bringing those notes to that discussion. And there was also an interesting one about um AI.

There's a program called Day of AI that looks that provides um AI literacy toolkits and that are free and I I think that's something that we might want to look into if if our um if we haven't already looked into that. Uh and then I went to a couple of different cell phone sessions that might come up in our next discussion.

Thank you. So, was it the four of you that attended?

Good. How was the uh uh keynote? Usually very good. Really inspiring.

Yeah. Always. Yeah. It was was very amped after it. Yeah. High energy. Oh, he was or you were.

No, he was. Oh, he was. And then I was. Yeah. Okay.

Okay. Yeah. I I uh I don't know who sources their keynote speakers, but every year I'm blown away. So great job whoever that is out there.

I think it's Eileen.

Is it Eileen? Yeah. So um for Karen and Maria's sake, so once a year MSMA, which is the main school management association, is kind of the trade organization lobbyist group that um supports all of school boards in the state and superintendent in the state.

They have a conference, a two-day conference up in Augusta, and they have a variety of sessions on everything from special education law to cell phones to nutrition to therapy dogs. Maybe, I don't know, maybe maybe Emily can do one next year. Um, so, uh, it's it's a great, um, it's a great opportunity to get a lot of information about a variety of different school board stuff. Um, so, um, highly recommend. Uh the unfortunate part about when you guys came on is it's right after. Um but um but they have it every year. So next October. Something to look forward to.

Yeah. I just thought of one of I went to one that was about um advocacy and advocacy as a listening body which was quite interesting. And one of the questions that I feel like we've kind of talked about maybe at our retreat um that was interesting to me was considering if you're persuadable when you're listening. Um and I thought that was like just an interesting question knowing that we sometimes have to make tough choices and have compleing priorities. Um that's a question that's sort of been rattling in my brain is yeah before we're listening are we persuadable?

Yeah.

Now I'm going to like be thinking about that.

All right. Um so uh we do not have any policy on the agenda for tonight. Um and so we will move on to item 12 which is the cell phone um conversation. Um I'm not going to get a motion on the floor yet because I think we want to kind of decide the direction we want to go before we decide what that motion is. Um I do think there was some requests for information from the last meeting that we had that I think you had some updates for us.

Yes. Um let's start with those.

Thank you. Um, the problem with this product is that it's much more breakable. It's not flexible. So, if you have to put not only a phone, but a watch or perhaps if you think ahead like a meta glasses or something like that in there, you're not going to fit them in there. Um, it costs less than the yonder bag, but how does it open?

It like magic.

He show He did show me and now I can't remember how it opens. I forget.

I love that our sixth graders will figure that out in 12 seconds. They will for sure. But our superintendent, not so much. I mean, that's how everything works, right? So, the yonder bag, it's magnet. There we go. That is now closed. Um, and it just opens very quickly and you put it on the magnet. The magnet is pretty heavy. Um, you can pass these around if you like. One can go this way, one can go that way. Um, if you bear with me for just a minute, My laptop is back in my bag and I have some information from Sam to um Okay, so yes, it's a new germ new case.

The plastic one is called New Germ. New Germ new case.

Um pricing the yonder bags are $35 with no grant which already includes a 12 12% discount. there's a uh maybe a possibility of $20,000 with a grant which would essentially amount to 50% off for us. Um he has pursued that but we would have to have an answer on ordering those by November 14th.

Um could you say those numbers one more time, Tom? Sure. Sorry. So, so the yonder bags without any kind of grant or a special offer are 35 um $35,000 for all the ones that we would need, which is how many?

That includes a 12% discount. He didn't give me a number of bags, but that would be enough for the high school and the middle schools.

Okay. Okay. So, all six through 12. Yes.

So, basically the same people were giving a computer to correct. Um there is a possibility of getting a 20 uh getting those at $20,000 which amounts to about 50% off the price.

So that's if we were successful getting the grant it goes from 35,000 to 20,000. Correct. Okay. The 35,000 includes a 12% discount.

Correct.

Okay. So Sam cites some reasons to go with Yonder. It is a known solution that is already used in locally in other schools. It's relatively easy to operate. If you have an emergency, you can easily like cut through the bag. You can, you know, to to get to that phone if there's a real need. The bag itself is flexible and pliable so that if you need to get more things in there, you can. Um, and it also, for that reason, is probably more durable in that it's flexible.

He also, what he has for me is reasons to go with Yonder and reasons not to go with new case. So, so the same thing.

Um, new case, more difficult to open, close, lock, and operate. Um, made from hard plastic, which means they would be fast to break with drops and unable to cut through easily in an emergency. Um, built around the shape of the phone, would not be able to secure new form factors like smart glasses. How much stuff you get an iPad in there?

Let's see. We're just testing it out.

What's the the cost of the new the new form? Did he not get that?

He didn't supply that for me. I asked him on the phone just before he came we came in. Um and I'm going to repeat exactly what I said. He's it's less but it's not a lot less.

Okay.

And the grants, are they specific to Yonder or It's a special offer from Yonder. But wait, there's more.

Okay. It's it the way Sam presented it to me, it's sort of like if you make this deal now, you'll get this much off.

Sounds like it's incent with early childhood education. It does.

So, can I can I talk a little bit about some of the research I did between both the Yandere and New Case because it seems like those are really the two options. At least I couldn't find any other real good options. Um, the new case has a three-year warranty on it as far as manufacturing defects. I don't know what they count as that.

Um I'm pretty sure our high schoolers blow through uh manufacturers warranties pretty quick, right? So what I read about Yonder was actually that it was less durable, not more.

Uh maybe that's not true, but that's that's what I what I what I seemed to read. Also, you talked about how in an emergency you're more able to get into the yonder, but then we talked about how the new case is less durable and drops.

So, it seems like there's probably an equal ability to get into either of them.

The way that but throwing the thing on the floor is probably not the best way to get your phone out.

Yeah, but that's only an emergency situation. If if if you have a yonder bag, you can cut it open. If you if you wanted to get into the plastic thing, you might have to like smack it and break your phone inside. The thing that I found on the Yonder bag that was like the Achilles heel was that like pin, it bends and breaks and then it's like a whole new bag and it's a whole new process and like like you can just easily like I poked myself with it not even meaning. Right. Already broke it.

That was the thing that it wasn't it wasn't so much the bag. It was actually the pin and its locking mechanism that was the the thing that broke the most often and was like very easy to break on like usage all the time.

And I feel like um I feel like one of the things Jen mentioned to me when she was telling me about going to the sort of training session at Portland High School for her for her for her kids. um was uh they said the pin could be like used as a weapon like you could poke somebody with it. I mean it is quite substantially sharp.

Yeah. Um I I actually called the new case guy cuz they had a phone number and it was like really easy to do.

Um it's 80 bucks a base plate and 20 bucks a thing. So what's a base plate and a thing?

So like the the See the magnet? That's the Oh, so it is magnetic. Yeah, they're both magnetic.

Okay, they're both um Okay. So it it's uh like it would be like 13,000 for the district depending on how many we got of course. So it is I would say substantially cheaper.

I mean if we're talking 20 with a grant versus 13 without a grant. That's a big percentage. Yeah.

And in looking at the yonder grant, it needs to be implemented by January 26.

So if we don't think we have the capability of implementing by January 26, I don't think we qualify for that. So, um, where's the other one? I want to like magnet it.

I have a question. Are are we allowed to say mean things about these products? All because we're we're on YouTube.

Like, I'm just I'm honestly asking. Like, mean things? Yeah. What are you going to say?

I I find that product ridiculous. Uh Oh, you hadn't said the mean thing yet. I was like, what did we say? Uh, so you know what? This is based on a VCR case. No, what it's based on.

But you know those like security cases at Target or whatever where they like lock things in them. Yeah. Yeah. That's what those are. Oh, that makes sense, right? Like where you at? You have to go up to the technology thing for them to swipe it out.

I don't know. I feel like I've had a bad experience with something like that in my past life or something. Like my emotional reaction was really I viscerally don't like it. Little Mermaid.

Um but that's it's completely aesthetic and emotional. Well, I also don't think I mean the aesthetic other problem is is I'm not even sure like I couldn't fit my watch and my phone in there. Is that the only size? They have an XL.

I don't know how much how much bigger that would be. Yeah.

So, part of what I am just thinking as we talk about this is we we may want to talk just conceptually about where we are with the cell phone ban.

Yeah. before we get before we get into this of of products because if we say no band then these are all just fun plate play things to do with yeah exactly it's sort of you know a moot point um did we have any luck I think one of the other things we were hoping to get was some feedback from some students that had from the schools did we get any I don't know if Phoebe passed that along to you before I could give feedback.

Okay. Um I do feel somewhat compelled to share that I have been, you know, this is anecdotal for sure, but I do have a like a vast spy network across the state in schools um especially in Camden where which is a school that we've talked about. I've been on the phone with quite a few of my former colleagues um who are working through who who just implemented a ban and have gone with yonder. So the feedback that I've gotten universally is that the good news is the ban has been very very easy to implement and um has definitely reduced like the phones are gone. The phones are not in use. The bags kids aren't using them. they have bought the bags. The feedback from teachers is generally speaking the kids are coming in saying, "Oh, my phone," or like waving a bag saying, "Yeah, my phone's in here." Or the phone is in their backpack. It's away somewhere. Um, but the phone is not really in the bag. It may be in the bottom of the backpack, wherever. Um, but the desired effect is that the phones are away and they're not fighting that battle. So, for what that's worth, that's pretty consistent feedback I'm getting from colleagues I trust that are in the middle of it.

Maria, um, from just hearing how much yonder pouches cost, I feel like you would want them to be effective. And Superintendent Gray made a good point that the phones are away at the end of the day because students don't want them to be taken away if they're not in the pouch. But if you're spending so much money on something, you want it to be put in use.

And I feel like maybe there are other ways cuz I feel like some classrooms are really strict about the phone policy and they are a way. And I feel like students would figure out a way to get around the yonder pouches. And I just feel like if you're spending so much money on something, you want them to be put to use. Yep.

I'm just curious if you've heard about schools that have used other implementation strategies such as centrallylo lockers that can be so you you know it can easily be seen like they're all in a wall or something. I don't know. But you can easily walk through and oh this person's phone isn't there. Why not? You know I'm just curious if there are other strategies that are used like lockers or bins besides these pouches that they just take with them. I don't have a lot of information about that. Sorry.

Clearly, I'm not smart enough to use this one. So, it just it slides over and pops open. There are schools.

There are schools that have bell-to-bell bands that are off and away all day and there aren't devices. So, that I believe that that's I think that's Windom. That's what Windham's doing this year.

Yeah. So, so there's there's an option that doesn't involve any device that's still a bell-to-bell ban, right? And policy. So the for me the concern about that is and it's the same concern as saying well at least it's off and away and we're not seeing it. Um I think one of the other big areas that we want to think about is like the bathrooms. Um, and you know, if I just have this not locked and I have access to it or it's just in the bottom of my bag, then then I've sort of um, you know, defeated the purpose of of having the, you know, no phones all day, right? Cuz I I could keep it out I could keep it away during all my classes and in the hallway and in lunch, but I'm still using it in the bathroom. Um, and to me, that's one of my concerns. I I don't think anything is going to be foolproof, right? Like there is not a nothing is right there. There is not a rule that's ever been made that hasn't been broken. A kid hasn't figured out how to break that rule. Um but is the benefit of you know 90% um you know adoption and using it appropriately good enough so that it's you know it lessens the the need for the work on the other 10. I I don't know, Kelly.

Yeah. I guess one of my concerns about not using any device at all is that we don't want to add to teacher burdens by um implementing a cell phone ban. Like I don't want them to have to feel like they're policing kids all the time, right? Knowing it's in their bag and we shouldn't see it, but like I mean one of the other things I heard was like in passing, if you've ever been, we were here yesterday during passing, it is very busy in the hall. There's no way teachers could know if kids had their phones out. Like there's no way you would know.

So Cara and I went to the same um presentation. She sent the slide deck for it for RSC1. Um couple things. They considered a centralized location for folks to put their phones in. Um but legal was worried about taking possession of personal property and what that might open up. Um, so they kind of dismissed that as a too big a burden.

Um, they use yonder pouches at RSU1 and they had three student delegates come and talk about the impact that it had on on their schools. They've had it for over a year. Um, granted it's three voluntary delegates, so we have to take some of that feedback with a little bit of a grain of salt because I'm sure they got some kind of brownie points for it. that um there was one student that stated that he was extremely offended that he wasn't being trusted and that the pouches were implemented um when he thought putting it away was enough and stated that in the later year in the spring that he found himself using the pouch anyway because he wasn't able to control himself enough not to get further into the um corrective action. ction route because he would try to self-regulate and the temptation would be too much and he would be caught. So the piece of the implementation that I think if we do go pouch route um even more so for the success that we want would be getting the buyin from the teachers of making sure that there's zero tolerance across the board because if you have anybody who's weak on that then it's you're going to lose your compliance right away. I think if the if the teaching staff aren't willing to be zero compliant or zero tolerance at the beginning at the outset of like soon as you see a phone this is the first step, this is the second step and continuing to drill it home of this is just what we're doing now. Um it's not a punishment, it's just getting used to the new norm.

Um then you're not going to have compliance. Um, and a lot of it is trust as well. Students are allowed to say, "It's in my car." And they're trusted that it's in their car. Um, but the proof is in the lack of phone in your hand and the reasonable amount of time you're in the bathroom. I think all of the normal tells.

Yeah. I'm and I'm just thinking back to Emily Grim's presentation and how that that positive joyful um positive joyful No, it is not. But but I do think that there could be an aspect where we do emphasize to the kids the benefits of putting these things away and really talk up how this is going to be helpful for their well for their well-being and how that could actually kind of help with compliance as well.

Yeah, I think the of the students that came and spoke um they they also emphasized the the need to explain why. I asked a question at the end like if we student voice is very important to us. We might not be doing what the students want, but is there a way we can communicate this best to students so that they can feel a little more on board? Um, and that was one one piece is just making sure that they understand why and the benefits. Um, they the staff in RC1 also said that they weren't at a place yet of not having to ask them in the morning, is your phone in your pouch or like where is your phone? Basically, but they have a routine down. They have a couple of tables with two magnets um adhered to the tables and they have two staff members on each of the at each of those tables in the morning and um they have the system down. If it starts to get backed up, it might delay kids 30 seconds. Um they also have people with handheld magnets ready at the end of the day. um 12 handheld magnets that they can use in the afternoon and also one on the outside of the school building on the concrete that students can go right they can go outside and do that.

Um so I I think that we have a lot to learn from that district. They seem to really have it down. It seems to be going well. Um, and they also have the, you know, first and second offense, students have one hour detention, then the third offense, a two-hour detention, and the parent has to come get the phone. If there's a fourth offense, they have one day of inschool suspension and a fifth or more out of school suspension. Um, they haven't they've actually had a 50% reduction in suspensions.

Um, and but they have noticed health center visits have gone up because students aren't just texting their parents saying that they're sick and they want to go home. They're actually going to the health center. So, that was an interesting um consequence. Um, and oh, if they break it or lose it, it's $35 or they can um give two hours of community service. Um, and what you were saying that it's um, it's not taking phones away. I mean, we are taking access to the phones away, I suppose, but we're not taking their phones um, by using a or they're not taking the phones by using a yonder pouch. Um, so I there one thing also is that they did not include earbuds in these restrictions. So that is something that we would also want to have some guidance around the policy if we were to what we're including in this. And then as far as this discussion goes too, I think we we're deciding what this is to give the policy committee some direction on what to draft, right, for a policy, but we don't ne we're not necessarily creating or are we also the policy committee creating a procedure because I think if I'm remembering the policy does not include how the how the schools are going to meet the policy correct Yeah, I would think we would probably not want to get granular in the implementation into the policy because that gets tricky when you want to shift something. Colin, um yeah, I agree. But I think that at least the way I'm approaching uh this conversation in the context of the cell in terms of the policy is that um I think they I think they have to be linked and we I think we have to be clear. Uh, I think I mean my sense is tonight um were we to decide to uh ask the policy committee that I serve on uh to write a policy that outlines a bell-to-bell ban. Um we would also be um as a board directing the superintendent to make that procedure simultaneously.

Yeah. Right. That's that's my understanding of what this conversation is. It's not it's not a it's that they happen like it's a complete deal of like we're not we're not doing one and being like well draft the policy then figure it out which I do not think is what you're suggesting at all Cara but like just to be really clear like I think that's what that's how I'm approaching it tonight and um yeah and I guess just I would say two things just very specifically on the question of the um on the question of the band I I will own that in um in May when this came up um I was very impatient um and very much at a sense of I think I said on camera everybody can go back and check the YouTube that there's nothing new we can learn about this that will change our minds um and um that sense of impatience is definitely one that I hear from some of folks in the community that are wondering why we have why we have taken so long and I remember Cara um uh saying no, we should take some time and walk through this to make sure we have buyin from all of the stakeholders. if not buy in this everybody saying yes and jumping off tables and building pillow forts because they're so excited about it. But that everybody has felt engaged and everybody everybody else has felt heard he heard because we also have uh um received input from other districts.

um that if you don't do that um any initiative will effectively fail and it will fail in terms of creating a healthy environment for the students to learn within and that is uh that is what we are mandated to do. So, um while again I my my thoughts uh have not evolved at all in terms of my sense that um do cell phones belong in an academic setting in Freeport uh in uh middle school or high school. No, that's what I thought in May and I think that now. Um but I think we're better as a um as a board and I think as a district for having gone through uh that process. Um so Cara, thank you for um encouraging us to do so. Um the second thing I would say is that I am I'm absolutely in favor of a of moving toward a bell-to-bell ban. Um I'm uncomfortable doing so without and we talked about this at the last meeting a bit. I'm uncomfortable doing so without a clear um uh process that's implemented that is larger than just banning the damn phones, but rather a larger educational and sort of social wellness um project to not like develop some really cool arguments to give to the high school students of like why this is super cool that we should all do it but just saying like no we understand this is part of a large this is about this is about technological literacy it's about like the the link between um technology and mental health um so I think on the one hand I'm very eager to direct uh Tom to to basically like let's get on that let's get them yonder bags um or the VHS uh tape recorder things which again thank you Valerie so much for that amazing image and that's all I can think of cuz it's awesome. Um, on the one hand I'm like I'm I really want to jump on that and be like yeah let's get that grant like let's get that grant and let's get some fundraising going for that. On the other hand and then implement it as uh as Chris was saying to be prepared to implement it um I would assume we would be trying to implement that uh the first day back from winter break. Um, on the one hand, I'm ready I'm ready to do that. On the other hand, I don't think um we have I don't think we have the resources, certainly monetarily um to really make sure we're putting in place a healthy structure to make sure that when that ban does go into effect um that the um that the students feel um the only word I can think of right and I was held in terms of like understanding the impact of that and understanding and like how to provide support structures for that in terms of mental health and how to provide whether it's um outside you know folks coming in from outside to talk about technology. So that's the conundrum where I am right now like I'm totally in favor of of telling myself as the head of the chair as the head of the policy committee to like start drafting that policy. Um, but it's the t it's the timeline and it's the money that I just don't know how to factor in uh to that question.

So, I emailed a funding guide that Yonder has put together to you, Tom, to see if they recommend a number of title funds that schools could use to help fund this. Um, and I was wondering what your thoughts were on that if if and your thoughts in general. Are there, you know, I know we're our budget's going to be really tight this year and we're about to hear more about that. And um, so I I I understand that. I'm wondering if there's if there's any wiggle room with being able to fund, especially if we were to make a decision by November 14th, $20,000. And if you did hear from anyone in the community saying they're willing to help fund raise because that's that's an amount that seems to me like a doable fundraising amount for a community if if there are enough people in the community who are willing to help with that and to make that donation though this is also a tough time where there are a lot of donation needs out there.

Um so I'm wondering what what your thoughts are on the funding part. So in terms of the title grants, we would have to write that into one of our title projects which for this year are done. So we could take take that under advisement for next year. Um and we would just have to figure that's that's something we would be figuring out next spring and then I guess the only caveat I have for that is who knows what's going to happen with title grants this year given where we were last year.

Um but we'll jump off that bridge when we come to it. Um, I have not yet heard back from anybody in the community who would be who's offered to partner with us to fund raise, but it's early days and we could certainly make an effort there. Um, in terms of coming up with like the largest number I saw there from Sam was $35,000.

I'm not going to say that $35,000 grows on trees. Kelly and I could certainly look and try to find ways that where where we could find it. um it would mean shifting money, sacrificing it somewhere else and we'd have to become granular and talk to you about that when we have a proposal. In terms of just my perspective of having worked in high schools for a really long time, I think that you have the um I think you can move forward with different pieces of this at different paces. I think that you can decide right now where you want to go with just the access you want to provide for the devices whether that's a bell-to-bell ban or whatever it is you can give that direction to the policy committee now and the policy committee well it's actually on the agenda for the policy committee tomorrow right um in anticipation that there would be some direction tonight um we can then also move forward with figuring out how you would like to have this implemented. Um, one of the solutions that has come to my mind frequently is to knowing and believing the and and I can see it, you know, having just been in classrooms with kids in high schools and dealing with disciplinary issues in high schools for a really long time.

I can see how somebody here mentioned that we're trusting kids when they say it's in my in my car, it's in my bag.

One of the things that we don't we don't want to put our teachers in a position of having to constantly power struggle every time a kid says that. Um, so solutions that I've heard about in other schools are that that have made the investments in yonder bags across the board is that they're using those really they're only using them in the extreme cases when you have a repeat offender.

Um, so there may be a way to step into that that goes with a smaller number of yonder bags to use for cases that really need them and then see how it goes and expand it over time if cost upfront is something that is an issue that that might otherwise stop us. Um, so I think my overall point is that I don't know that we need to be concerned. I don't know that you need to be concerned about holding back on a decision about which way you want to go with phones tonight because of the logistics. We can figure out the logistics including the money.

I just have a question about the under patches. Would the pouch be in your backpack or would it be in a certain classroom? You would have it with you.

And have there been other strategies about putting phones up? um the way certain teachers do it by having a name and a number track to it and has that been reinforced more in classrooms because I haven't I haven't seen other sorts of strategies besides going straight to yonder pouches.

Yeah, I think you know what we've heard mostly from ways people have approached it. Um sort of the the phone tree piece which is not away all day because you guys obviously have them between trees um in the hallways and at lunch. Um there's the off and away which is we don't want to see your phone. Don't don't take it out. Leave it in your car. Leave it in the bottom of your bag.

Whatever that looks like for you. Don't bring it at all. Um and and it does sound like there's a few schools that have gone that way. I think that's that's Windom that comes to mind this year. Um has has taken that approach and I think initial thoughts are that it works okay for them so far. Um and I don't I don't know the way I think about that is for for me it's one thing to blatantly lie to a teacher who says is your phone in your bag? Yes, my phone's in the yonder pouch and it's not. um that feels like a a more overt breakage of the rules as opposed to well they let me keep it in my pocket like they don't care if I use it in the bathroom like that I don't know maybe it's maybe it's the same amount of rule breaking it just feels like an easier line for kids to cross. Um, we also have a new tool that's tracking.

It's an electronic past system that's just been put into effect recently here at the high school that is, you know, it it tracks right away. Oh, that kid's been in the bathroom for 15 minutes and there's a way to know that already. It's pretty easy.

My question would be, are we doing anything with that data? Right? because I still think only cuz I have a son who's like, "Yeah, I can't believe kids are just missing long periods of time and they don't see anything happening with that, but in his mind it's this weird now electronic system to go to the bathroom." Um, and so, you know, I don't know. I I I just wonder that's another thing that you're adding to the teachers. We talk about we don't want to put all this on them to be checking the bags, but they're going to have to check the bag. Someone's going to have to check to make sure it's in there.

Otherwise, it's 100% we're just trusting you put it in the bag when you walked in the door.

Well, except I I do have to say this about that. We can't search a kid without reasonable cost. I get that. And that would amount to a search. No, no, I get that.

I think what they do in Portland is they go, "Okay, here's my phone. Here's my bag." Boom. And they walk in the door.

They walk past the staff person. Now whether they close it or not, that's up for debate. But the issue that we run into, Maria, with the the phone trees is that if the intent is to the if the intent is to have kids not engage with their phone at all all day, every time you go in and reach for your phone and put it in the tree, it's it's another it's time and attention to let's talk about phones, let's reinforce phones. It's even a few minutes at the beginning of class where people have to think about touch phones, put a phone away, and then at the end, same thing again and look like whose phone isn't there? Oh, Maria, did you bring your phone? No, I don't have my phone. Like, they're wasting a lot of time. It sounds like um both of my parents are teachers. My dad works here. I know how difficult phones are in a classroom. I always put mine up. And I think that the way of going you only have a wander patch if you're a repeated offender would be a strategy that I think students would be more happy about cuz I know myself and other people put their phone up and I'll I've like I said my parents are teachers. I want to make teachers lives as easy as I can but I would not want to put my phone in a yonder pouch.

Why I don't want to put my phone Um, I have representative on the school board. I have driver's ed. I have other extracurriculars that I need my parents to be aware of.

Like you can email, my dad works here. I could call his room. Some kids don't have that privilege and they might rely on that text or that call.

Um, also teens get sick. they have health problems. Sometimes you just need to text your mom, "Can I go home?" And I think being a repetitive offender, you deserve to be able to put your phone up. But as somebody who is not, I don't I feel like it would be a little It wouldn't feel super fair to me. But I understand why you would do it.

It it's I think exactly what you said is is the is the existential crisis in this, right? Because it feels like, oh, I can handle my phone. You don't need to take it away from me. But the fact that you feel like you need your phone is the whole reason we need to take it away.

And we're actually giving you a gift to not even have to worry about it. Not to worry who's texting you, who's who's posting on this, and who's doing that.

Um, you know, I I know it's crazy to believe, but we never had phones and we all got our got to our jobs and our sports and like it, you know, it sounds silly to say that, but it it's just a reset of it's just a a sort of resetting our mindset around accessibility. Like, do you need to be accessible for those eight hours or should you be able to focus on you and your friends and your classes and your learning and not have to worry about that at all? It feels very like punishment-like when we say, "Well, I could handle it, but you shouldn't have to." I think is part of the point. Chris, I was going to say something similar, too. I imagine that most of the people here on the board went to high school without phones and we still had those activities. And um I I I've heard that from students and like I do sympathize with it quite a lot. I I think that that in talking or with with what Colin said about the education piece on this is not just talking about the mental health, but also talking about some of the logistics of, hey, if you need to communicate, this is how you can do it because there's all these other ways that we can have these kids communicate with their parents or with whoever else they need to communicate with. Um, and you know, you said sometimes you just need to text your mom that you need that you're sick and you want to go home.

which is another reason we heard that health visits have gone up, nurse's visits went up, which is actually a good thing because a nurse is just that one more point of contact of maybe the kid is sick. Uh the nurse can evaluate that in in a small way which could prevent some of the future issues. So, I think that there's a lot of ways that maybe don't seem natural to the kids now, but that might seem more natural to us as adults who didn't live through that we probably should try to communicate with that type of thing.

Yeah, I think the education piece is huge and I think I've said that since the beginning. It we we need to sort of shift that paradigm that this is because we feel like you can't handle it and more that you shouldn't have to. Um, and I think that's going to be huge. Cara, I think it was RSU1 that said they installed another phone line expecting there to be more phone calls from parents and students to parents and it was hardly used. Like maybe in the first week it was used a bit more, but but parents and students realized they had to really think, do I really need to contact my parent right now? Do I and the parents might say, do I really need to contact my student right now? Can it wait until 2:30?

and people just realized that they didn't need to be contacting each other as much during those hours which I thought was really interesting.

I do feel somewhat compelled to share an anecdote that is I think instructive. So one of the things that I as a teacher did many many times was international trips and I can't tell you the difference in flavor of those experiences between when I was doing them in let's say 2008 versus 2018 and in 2008 kids could not bring phones with data on trips and in 2018 they could.

And there's value in the experience of those kids going away to the UK or France or whatever it is and having their experience not necessarily being able to call home every time they felt anxiety about homesickness or whatever it was.

And that that led to a whole piece of education as we like step by step got into more experiences where the the connection between home and kids abroad was increasing every single time and educating parents and kids about the value of disconnecting and letting them have their experience and working through the bumps that come up. Um I I just I I as I listen to the conversation I have to recall that and that really has been a dynamic I thought about and lived a lot. Um, I would also just encourage us to one of the things I've seen in schools that have implemented this like so many other things is that there's a large degree of no matter how much we plan out when we start there's a lot we have to figure out as we go as as we like walk into the fog and things become clear and I think we need to anticipate whatever decision is made tonight there will be a significant amount of that and then knowing that we shouldn't necessarily feel that we have to have everything figured out tonight to make a decision to take whatever the next step is.

Follow up on that. I think that's a really good point. Um that this whatever we decide on, we probably will evolve and change. Um I worked in a school long long time ago um when smartphones were pretty brand new. So I'm aging myself here. Um, and we I was did a lot of work creating a cell phone policy and it changed many many times over the course of of the first few years we had it. So, I think that's something that's really important to keep in mind. I was just thinking, you know, since Emily's here, like we're like 6 through 12, I think there's fifth graders who have phones.

Like, so what's do do we, you know, do we have to expand this? Like, hi kindergartener, here's your yonder bag.

Like, I don't know. I'm just thinking about like to your point, we don't want to make it so strict and be like, "Look, we've outgrown it already." So, no, but the ban would apply to fifth graders. Certainly would. Right.

Right. And that's one of the reasons maybe we don't.

All right. We can make an exception just for fifth grade. Fifth grade is the oneth graders totally totally capable of having their cell phones.

Yeah. I mean, I might uh Sorry. Sorry, Karen. What about Max? Yeah, Karen.

Um, I just wanted to ask and I think you may have just answered this question. it is middle school and high school. I I wasn't quite clear on that.

Yeah. I mean, I think um a ban would be the district. Um and sort of the uh execution of that that policy would be, you know, in all likelihood those bags for 6 through 12. Um and then we just tell fifth graders to leave your, you know, meta glasses at home.

I have one more thing. Um, my child does not have a phone in sixth grade and will not have one for a few years. And she asked me, "Well, what do I do after school if I my plans change or I want to go to the library?" I said, "We make a plan before I leave you in the morning." And if it changes, there's telephones in the school. And she actually had to use it the other day because one of her clubs got cancelled and I got a phone call at home and it said Freeport Middle School calling and I was like, "Oh dear." Yeah. So I answered it and she said, "Hi, I need to be picked up." I'm like, "Okay, no worries." So So it works.

Yeah. Exactly.

I I would also like to note the the Freeport Library has installed a phone in the hallway that is free for anyone to use.

Oh, that's good to know, Kelly.

Yeah, I noticed in the presentation slides that Cara provided with us that other schools have also included smartwatches in their ban. And as someone whose child has texted me from her smartwatch during the day when she should not have been doing so, I would highly encourage us to in include smartwatches. Yeah, I think that's uh why the the wording of this is uh cell phones and other personal electronic devices in schools policy. Um and and this is something I think we need to think about too, right? like if they have their own iPad that they use instead of their laptop, is that included? Is that not? Um, you know, there's things other than I mean I like I know I have a kid who has a laptop and she has her laptop, but she also has an iPad that she takes her notes on and does it all that way. Like is that just things to think about?

Yeah, I I mean I guess I would say I would um I'm happy to keep talking about this because I en enjoy everybody and what they have to say, but I also might say uh might we be at a moment where we could ask Tom uh Tom based on your knowledge of these cell phone policies that you have started to look at because we have a policy committee meeting tomorrow. um what is the information you need from the board or we need from the board um in order to um start to figure out uh as you've put it kind of which variation we go with um were we to uh pursue a ban? I mean, just to be completely honest, as I read the room right now, I think the easiest way to do this would be for somebody to make a motion that basically mirrors what's in front of you. Uh to draft, you know, if someone were to make a motion to draft a cell phone and other personal electronics, devices, and schools policy that executes a bell-to-bell ban. And if that motion were made and seconded and voted upon and we see how it goes, that might give pretty clear direction. But but we don't have to do that until next year. It's not like required by the state. So let's just wait till next year. Yeah. I'd like to make that motion. Uh put down the book consider Can we How do I make it? What do we do?

you. Yeah, that. So, do I have a motion for cons for consideration and approval to instruct the policy committee to draft a uh draft a cell phones and other personal devices, electronic devices in schools policy to execute a bell-to-bell ban in RSU5.

So, moved.

Thank you. Do we have a second? Thank you. Okay. I love us all be like, if we were to institute a ban, maybe if we didn't like, but yeah, let's get it on the floor. Um questions, comments?

I feel like we need to know is this a bell to bell ban? Is I said belt to bell bin. Okay. Sorry. Yes. And I guess with that, one thing that we learned is that some schools will um uh in a situation where students are leaving school early for a field trip or for a sporting event, are those students allowed to have that on the school bus, have the phones out on a school bus or not? Uh I think that's just something we would want to make sure we have some In other words, flesh out what bell to bell means.

Yes, exactly. Thank you. Um, what was my other thought with that, Cara? Also, the tech school.

What's that? Oh, and at the tech school, right? What's happening at the That's an interesting one. Like, how does how does region 10 play into this? Do they have their own?

Please allow me. Um, te up for that one, Valerie.

Yeah. Well, because I have joined the policy committee for our region 10. So, we are currently reviewing the cell phone policy. Um, currently it is just off and away. Um, it does not say anything about duration and it currently uh says both cell phone and smartphones. So, we're currently working on some refinements to change maybe smartphone to smart watches.

Do people have phones that aren't smart anymore? I don't know. I mean, they exist. Yeah.

Unless your kids are the ones that have them, though.

Yeah. So just I think that is a yeah I think so I think in terms of the policy that we would need to draft I think we would need to be looking at we would need to be looking at language that addresses um students during I'm thinking out loud students during academic school hour instructional time but not in the build but not in the building or off-site um how so we would need to be drafting language you'd have to yeah around Um and and also whether that's the same set of consequences or not other things that you've seen Tom in the policies that this question of what gets included smartwatches came up here is that um like earbuds um and one thing I I feel fully comfortable sharing is that is entirely possible and one might even argue advisable to include earbuds um because we can easily supply earphones that would be connected to school devices that could be used for kids who need to be accessing something on that device for um for instructional purposes. You know, some kids have like um being able to listen to music or whatever for their IEPs, but we can do that from a school device um pretty easily.

So, if you have earbuds and your phone is in the yonder pouch, what good are the earbuds? I mean, can you tie it to your could you tie it to your your laptop?

So, why what what what's the downside to having I mean, if you can listen to music because I mean that's one of the things that I have heard um you know that is that is a coping mechanism for some people who don't necessarily want the socialization piece of all the kids in the cafeteria like they'll put their earbuds in and listen to music instead. Um, and I guess what's the downside of that?

That I mean you could take a call. You could be on a phone call with your phone with your phone in a yonder pouch if your earbuds were connected to your phone and your phone was on.

Like it doesn't it doesn't deactivate your ability to use the phone, right?

I mean, let's be honest, kids in high school don't answer the phone.

Not once ever. Uh, sorry. It's just my kid. Yeah.

One of the challenges RSC1 cited was being on earbud watch. So that that by not including that in the in their policy, um that has been a challenging piece and and watch for people being on the phone.

Yeah. I mean, I just I know I have one kid that like that helped him focus in class to have one earbud in um to listen to music and and that would be a challenge for him, but he didn't have an IEP that dictated it. So, I guess maybe you could get one if you needed one. Chris, as as an iPhone user, like if you had AirPods or something, you can ask Siri to do like anything, whether that's read your text, whether that's text somebody, whether that's, you know, do an internet search, whether that's that's anything. So, I think that's probably what they're what they're worried about. Yeah. Yeah. They're worried about in that. Okay.

So, we just have we just have to find other ways to support people that may currently be using earbuds in what is probably not an inappropriate use of, you know, listening to music, but we just might have to find another way to support them for that.

Another question, would there be any medical reason for someone to have a phone? I have a niece who has they're not colear implants but she has some device on under her skin and she regulates it through her phone whether it's turning up or down.

There are some and and some like diabetics diabetics Yeah. with pumps.

Um and we there are pol ways to address that in the policy that'll make exceptions for particular instances. So like 504 plans.

Yes.

So, because I'm also on the policy committee, we do have we were in our packet given the sample policy from MSMA and it includes different options that people can can consider and it also has a misuse of cell phones and other electronic devices section. So, I feel like that's something we would maybe want some guidance on. Um, and kind of like what I was saying, RSU1 has the first offense, second offense. The the sample policy has something very similar. Um, and refers to the student code of conduct and the the health and safety and emergency management plan in the event of a school emergency and and all of that. So I don't know if this is the type of thing where the policy committee just drafts something and brings it for first read or if we and then you give us your feedback then or if we want to go through each of these pieces. My thought would be you guys are very capable and I'd put say more complete trust in your ability to bring forward what you feel is the best um uh policy based on what you know about us and our district and our conversations and the recommendations. Um you know for me what I would like to give you first is you know the the north star which is is there a ban or is there not a ban. So you had asked kind of what like defining what a bellto bell would be. Um if I can have a recommendation my recommendation is is pretty much simply a in the school and out of the school recommendation.

So, in that sample policy, which I saw too, um it talked about bus transport and about how transport to and from school, the kids were allowed those phones. Um and then in theory, transport for field trips or things like that, the kids are also allowed those phones.

That's a gray area, which I'm not sure we would like to do or not. Um but bell to bell be meaning from the time the kids enter the school in the morning to the time the kids leave the school in the afternoon.

Yeah. And and I wonder if that's a distinction that could be made because, you know, in the procedure, right?

Because that may be that may be age-based, right?

You know, high school kids that are going on a 2-hour bus ride for, you know, a cross-country meet or something, they they may want to give them access to listen to music or whatever on their phones. You know, kids on a field trip or or younger kids that aren't going so far, probably not as necessary. So it could be, you know, that's one of the reasons I think you try not to make the policy too too concrete and narrow so that you have that space to to tweak it based on the needs of of the kids.

There wouldn't be anything in the policy to to be able I mean a teacher can at any point right now say you know what everybody phones away. Um, and you know, the fourth grade teacher who's going to the local dairy farm for the afternoon could just say, "Kids, put the if let's hope that not too many fourth graders." Gosh, fourth grade. But just using that as an example, it's only fifth graders.

You know, we're not what we're trying to do with this is to actually make it take this out of the teacher's hands so that they don't have to fight the battle.

Right, Valerie? So, I think if it's a field trip that's instructional, I for me that's within the bell-to-bell confines, but if it's a field hockey trip to a different region, they're not going to be pulling their cell phones out on the field generally. So, it's a totally different thing. Like you might see them start whipping out their phones on a field trip and if they're in the back kind of milling about, but it's unlikely if they're committed enough to go on a field hockey trip that they're it's unlikely they're going to start pulling their phones out on the sidelines.

So, it's funny. Um the girls soccer team had a playoff game on Friday and one of the senior captains at the front of the bus had a bag and she's like, "Everybody's phone in the bag." Uh, I mean it wasn't a super long trip, but she's like, "I want everyone focused on what we're doing." And, you know, it was a playoff game. It was a little bit more high stakes and yada yada, but I thought that was very interesting that that was that was driven by by the captains and the coach was like, "Yes, he hates the phones." Yeah. Um, yeah. I think one of the things just procedurally for us, I think I would want to make a step for the on the policy side where whatever we drafted before we brought it to the board, we would show it to some uh some body um at the at the high school and the middle school to sort of go like go over it in terms of like where like either what we're missing or where there are pressure points because I think I think yes, The the two major I guess for me the two major spirits of this ban are one all the preponderance of data points to there are no academic benefits to having academic or mental health benefits to having phones in the academic setting and two that it places an undue labor on the teachers to have to on the staff to have to manage it.

So, I don't want to create anything that accidentally um sets up um additional labor for the um for the staff. So, I think like I would just like that to be built in um to whatever our uh Yeah. No, I think that's a great idea.

Just like you know when you write a policy that you know includes the impacts the nurses, you run it by the nurses before it comes to us, right?

um yeah, the the unintended consequences of like this seems great and then they're like, "No, you hadn't thought about this stuff." My question is about um timing and like how feasibly quickly we could actually get through the process of policy writing and and voting.

So, I'm going to I'm going to That's a great question which we should get an answer to. I'm feeling like we're jumping past the vote. Um, I don't think any of these questions would change someone's opinion of the vote, whether it's, you know, what does bell-to bell look like, whether it's when do we start it, how do we pay for it. Um, does anybody have a question or a comment that they want to make before we actually make the vote on the motion and then we can kind of talk logistics.

Okay, so we have a motion, we have a second, right, Erica? Okay, great. I didn't write it down, so as long as you did.

Perfect. Um, all right. All those in favor. Opposed.

Okay. Thank you. Motion passes. All right. Just wanted to get that sort of done so we didn't forget to actually have that vote. Um, because I do think I do think that step is an important one.

Um, Colin.

Yeah. I guess just to Steph's question I think the way I've been thinking about it perhaps this is not accurate is that um if the uh if the board has given that mandate which they have given um uh then that also empowers sort of indirectly I guess the superintendent to start developing the timeline on on uh how to implement the bell-to-bell ban with or without the polic policy being in place, right? We don't is that accurate? Like so in other words like um technically without without a cell phone um policy per se uh you could either on your own initiative or with our direction say we have a bell-to-bell ban and start implementing that um immediately.

I mean that's basically what we did at the high school last year. The high school decided they wanted to change how they were doing it. it was in their handbook that we don't have a policy that says one way or the other they're able to do that, right? Like in theory, we could say tomorrow morning there are no phones in RSU5, which we're not doing, which we're not doing. We're not recommending anybody does, but logistically, you could, right? But I just wanted to bring it I wanted to to make sure we're clear on that because I think I'd want to I would want to decouple our um polic like policy language drafting and review process from the um process that the superintendent and the administration would make in actually moving forward to figure out how to um how to move forward with the board's will.

I would say though that I think they should go in tandem, right? Like I don't think we should necessarily institute the ban before we know what the policy is going to look like cuz we may end up totally back. Totally. But yeah. Okay. What happened?

I'm just shooting things off my my but just just step this very technically. Um we have to have a month between the first and second read. So if we were to be able to draft the policy tomorrow, which we're not going to be able to do, um if we were Sorry, don't sell yourself short. Um uh then we would bring that in. I guess my my kind of hope is that you know we will we will set to work on this tomorrow in the policy meeting. We'll have another policy meeting in December.

I would hope that we could have a draft of a policy to bring to the board for January for a first read. Right. And at the same time I will set in motion conversations with the uh the B team the principal group basically about how we would enact that in a procedure and so those two processes can work in tandem right but just very technically on that timeline January would be the first read if no one had any thoughts about it and we left it completely alone we would have to then give it a month and then it would be February before we could pass it as policy. So that's sort of the the fastest timeline just from a policy perspective.

So that's why I was bringing up that the the Yonder grant it has to be implemented in January of 26. So I I if if we don't have that capability based on the timeline we talked about, right, then we don't qualify for that grant through yonder.

Yeah. I mean, so I guess my question is is this is this a marketing ploy to get you to buy it today? Like if we called December 1st, would it be December 15th we had to make a decision by and implemented by February? Like I don't know. Maybe I'm maybe I'm cynical.

No, I thought the same thing. I think probably if if we decide to go with Yonder pouches, my guess would be that there would be some sort of deal at whatever point.

Looking at the marketing material from Yonder, that's actually what put me off from them.

They are very like that in a lot of different ways. M. And so I I I do worry that choosing them we would get stuck in some sort of some sort of system that we couldn't get out of. Um whereas we know the magnets work on if we switches. It doesn't work.

It's cuz this fell off.

If I could that's the yonder magnet, not the kid. No.

I mean if I could make a a recommendation just sort of from a global perspective about the products. I I certainly understand there's a price discrepancy in the products and including in the timing.

Um the amount of money that we're talking about while you know it's not insignificant in the global scheme of our overall budget is my personal opinion is that that shouldn't necessarily drive the bus. Um we want to be mindful of it but the it's like anything that you want to buy but you're not ready to buy it. if we're just not ready to buy it, we're not ready to buy it. Um, and so we'll move the process forward as as efficaciously as we can and as thoughtfully as we can and hopefully that coincides with a good deal that comes our way from whatever we decide to buy, if we decide to buy something at all.

Right. I just wanted to make sure that it was pointed out so people weren't expecting it. I appreciate that. They said 20 grand. Yeah.

Well, I'm I'm curious if they really wouldn't be flexible with a like a month there. Why would they even care when it's implemented? Once they bought it, why do they care? What does implementation mean?

Cuz corporations care about like they care about people and they care about like the impact of Yeah. Well, I know that. That's true.

I mean, if they knew if implementation includes finalizing a policy, I mean, if they knew we're working on this, I'm sorry. Well, and again the we want the policy and procedures to go, you know, in tandem, but we if we know that the direction of the policy is going to be a bell-to-bell ban, it's still might be up to the administrators to come up with the procedure of how they're going to implement that policy.

I would really like to ask the principles about more about now that we have this direction to dig into the issue of whether or not the devices are what they see as the best solution on the ground for them and we can get some good answers to that in the next month or so and bring that to the policy committee and that can inform how we write a procedure. And I guess another point I would make about procedures, this is just based on my past experience, because the procedure does not take as much deliberation as a policy.

We don't necessarily need to be afraid to start with something that's relatively boilerplate and then fine-tune it as we go because the fine-tuning is pretty is easy.

Which is why you don't put too much in the policy because that's a much more um robust process to change.

Um, please share what you had to say. Daniel. Danielle.

So, my only concern is I I I get $35,000, $20,000. Doesn't sound like a lot of money, but I do think it sounds like that's a salary for an edtech.

Maybe two edtes. I don't know. And I think fine. Again, I don't want the cell phones in the room in in the classrooms.

I don't I I I I'm not for the band for the belltobell. Um, and that's fine, but I think I'm I'm really not supportive of spending money that could go towards getting ad texts or spending money on curriculum that I think we really need to update and spending it on a bag that most likely is not going to be used by students and we're not going to be able to track it. the teachers aren't going to be responsible for that and you know the person checking them in. So, I really want us to think about that because I think come April when we're like we don't have the money for a couple edtes, then I think we're in trouble. And and I I think that that it's not fair to say to the public, sorry, you know, again, I see the benefits, but I think we have to be very um mindful of what this costs the public, right? Um, and I just want us to think about that before we jump in to buy a bag.

I I appreciate that you said that and I just want to make sure that my earlier comments I don't want them to be mis misconstrued. Like I'm not saying it's insignificant. I'm I think my overall point is that I don't want us to rush into a decision to save $15,000 if it's not the right decision for us.

Yeah. Um, Kelly left, but maybe we can check with her. Um, I I, you know, it's not fair to compare things. Um, but I think about how we just spent, you know, $25,000 restriping the track and, you know, items around the which we're investing in our our um infrastructure, which is important because we don't want it to crumble and then it costs more. Um, but I just wonder um made me think that it's over $5,000. Each individual one is less than $5,000. I don't know if it could be considered a capital expense that we could use the capital reserve fund for a small piece of it. Um, you know, we had some fair savings on some of the projects that we were working on in the capital, you know, the capital reserve this year in Panel. Um just just a thought um as a way to kind of not dip into what might be a staff position. Um I guess my my counter to that might be that you know a a halftime edtech position um could very well be taken up policing phone usage in our schools, right?

um you know it's it's yeah there's no way to know truly what that comparison is but um but yeah it's not nothing it's definitely um there's a cost um and I'm just afraid that a off and away is not going to be enough of a deterrent we'll wait for the principles yeah I think just a couple things I think one I want to make sure I don't think you would have it lost but I'm just going to say it make sure I don't lose it the education piece I think has to be bundled into it. So I think Tom when you go to the principles I think like that like it's a it's effectively two questions. One is like what how do we institute the ban and the other is how do we create a an educational initiative around that in order to um yeah in order to implement it. Again, not in a way that as I uh was hopefully saying earlier to like try to smooth talk the uh the students into believing our point of view, believing our point of view, but rather to like actually engage with the questions, actually engage with the questions of addiction, actually engage the questions of mental health, actually engage with the questions of how these devices are designed uh specifically to manipulate um the human mind in these particular ways. So I think like I just want to be very clear like that's my sense of what we are mandating Tom to do. The other is that I think would be I don't know we um to uh I think Daniel you mentioned this earlier the sort of opportunity to engage with um was it Gorum that has like sort of the way of engaging with the commu community and and community businesses. I wonder whether there's some sort of opportunity here in terms of reaching out to some of the community um companies in the community to say hey like again like will you can you work with us to to support and create this kind of initiative not just funding the bags but sort of like create again kind of create some sort of initiative that would um be better serving that I don't know I just think that might be kind of a um it's not a blanket for it but it's uh it's more it's more positive than um not and as I'm thinking about that and just sort of implementation and potential timelines and um you mentioned you know addiction I think I think this is going to be a you know I think it is easier to do it at the beginning of the year. I'm not suggesting we wait, but um when I think about like oh well when we come back from December break in January, well we are then two weeks before finals for the first semester. I don't think the two weeks before finals is a good time to basically put 90% of our kids through withdrawal um from their phones.

Um maybe it's the best time to do it to them. I don't know. But I'm just picturing the chaos that happens in this in this building during those two weeks.

um if if we were to do that. But I just um I would just encourage you when you're having those conversations with the principles be like thinking about those types of things like when would be the best time to to tackle this from an implementation standpoint, from a you know from a buyin standpoint, from a um you know the sooner the better from a health standpoint, but we also have other things that we have to take into account.

Yeah, that education piece um to me it's kind of got two pieces to it. there is the sort of the buy in and like educating kids around why this is important and then there's also kind of the digital citizenship piece that I think we probably already have pieces of that maybe scattered throughout our curriculum. Um and I kind of would like at some point I think we may have a place on our u agenda where this might fit to have an update on actually how we're addressing that.

Yeah. Yeah.

And and I second that third that on the education part because I think we're we're then not going to really be preparing them to go off to college when they're not going to have a yonder pouch. Let me just point that out. Um and they have to be able Yeah. And they have to be able to manage that. So we need to do some education with that. And I think you know Jen mentioned doing an assembly. You know assemblies to me are fun times. kids aren't really paying attention to, hey, why are we putting our, you know, phones in a pouch?

They're there to kind of celebrate something that's um in their mind positive, which this would not be um I don't think in many of their minds, but how about, you know, bringing it to health class or to their advisory? They meet every day with their advisory. Um I think that's a great opportunity to put something in. Um that way all kids are getting it and all grades are getting it. And then a health class, you know, every 10th grader has to take that class. and maybe we come up with a digital, you know, um, stewardship class or something, you know, that that kids can take or maybe we require that for them to take as they maybe are a senior or a junior or something like that. Just a thought process to add to our curriculum.

I can tell you that anecdotally, I was at Mass Landing just this week and I had the real pleasure of going to all the third grade classrooms and while I was put their phone away. Well, there was they were having an S seal class and um the teacher was very deliberately talking about online dangers during games and predatory behavior during games and lots of kids, these were third graders who had lots to say about it.

And so there are already things happening. And I think where I will start with this is to ask our team, what are we already doing and how can we build on that?

I um using my own experience and examining my use of my phone and technology, I I think that um and I don't know if this is feasible, but it's an idea that I had. So, I'm sharing of I wonder if there's space to sort of monitor what's happening with students before and after the ban. um and like monitor in like a curious way for themselves because my learning around technology has come from like restricting it to for myself and then like seeing how that goes or then re-engaging and seeing how that goes. Um and so that there's I think that the restriction can be used as almost like a learning tool or a curiosity. Um, and I wonder if that might be help a helpful way to feel like we're still listening to students as the policy continues to evolve. Um, that we're actually curious about what it's like for you before and after. Um, just an idea.

I think we could get Phoebe to help with that because I think the leadership committee does a lot of those questionnaires for the kids, right? So they ask them before and after kind of things like and I think they could easily probably do something like that and I'm sure Phoebe would probably love to help us with that.

Sorry Phoebe, we miss you Phoebe. You're never really gone.

Okay, so um so next steps is uh you we have the vote. Thank you for that. Uh the policy committee will begin their drafting tomorrow based on what they know now. Tom will uh uh meet with the the B team around just brainstorming what the implementation looks like, things to think about. The policy committee will run by their draft by those principles that will be mostly impacted. So the middle schools and and the high school to get their feedback.

Um, in terms of the method, what I feel like I'm hearing is we really want to hear from that B team.

They're, you know, not knowing what the the board's position is on the on the ban and our willingness to hear their recommendations for tools they would need to effectively um, execute that.

We'll we'll wait to hear from them on that. Is that what we're hearing? Is that what you heard too? That is what I heard.

Okay, great. Care in in a in other years if there's been an expense, let's say $20,000 uh that has not previously been budgeted for, is that something that you've needed board approval for?

I would it would depend on what it is and where we take the money from, where it comes from.

Okay. So, there is a possibility if you hear from the B team in the next couple of days that they're like, I think we're on board with the Yonder pouches. We'd really like to be able to do that. That you could by November 14th without our approval go forward with that.

I'm sure there's a way we could find that amount of money. I I'd have to talk to Kelly and get into the weeds on that, but I mean, if it were $200,000, then no. But 20 $20,000 we we could find a way. Um, and I would still let you know.

So that's a good point. So is there anyone who if if the resounding opinion of the of the principles was that was the route they wanted to go, was there is there anyone who feels strongly that we wouldn't want them to do that before we reconvened?

Okay.

All right. So I think I think you have a So my marching orders as I understand them are I will consult with B team about a procedure that would we would talk about whether or not we feel we need devices like yonder bags or new cases or new something.

um germs.

Um we will talk about that. We will certainly develop plans for an educational piece and again I want to reiterate I always feel that it's important to be curious about and honor the work that's already happening. So I'm going to start with really sussing that out and then finding where we should build upon that. Um and the timing that would be optimal. Um, I've heard that we should look into trying to find support for community businesses from community businesses to um help us either financially or with education or just in general. Um, we should try to figure out how we can build into the board's work plan for the remainder of the year some um report back to you about how we are educating kids about devices and the dangers and the the pitfalls and how we could build upon that. And then I heard Steph's point about finding a way to monitor or assess like pre and post. Um, and I'm I had not thought of that, but I think personally that's a great point and I'm curious about I also wonder if there's any data in that from the the um the main youth health survey.

Anyway, I I will I'll we'll dig into this.

That'll be an interesting one after once all these bands go into place. Valerie, I'm very sorry to bring this up now because I feel like you just put a bow on it and I'm about to tug. Um, another thing that they said in RSU1 is that they sort of unofficially instituted a staff policy of also having the bell to bell ban uh as a modeling device um and allowing students to report their teachers as uh accountability partners.

So um just maybe put out some feelers on that.

I kind of like that. I mean, you could have one of these in like the the teacher lounge, right? Like they don't have to physically leave the building to access, but you know, during their Okay. All right. Good for the goose, good for the gander. Is that what I'm hearing? Okay.

We do have a policy in place for staff, but it's not a spell. Yeah. Yeah.

Right. They do have a policy around cell phone. Tom, I don't think this is a change to your marching orders, but I just want to reiterate my point of like using that pre and post as a way of like continuing to listen to students and that we're that we're listening. So yeah.

Yeah. just on that and this I mean this is I guess it's the English teacher in me but like not uh perhaps it's a it's a more of a STEM data gathering exercise but I was thinking of it also more narratively like thinking of it in terms of like is there a way for the um uh is there is there is there a class for example for the um freshmen where they could be doing like a writing assignment about that that would again be be using be using that soort again sort of integrating it into um to again my assumption is there are we probably are have some uh learning goals around um uh organization of ideas argument right it's sort of like it's sort of building that kind of uh structure in there again I think that would be again I think that uh that feels better also just as a as a um as a pedagog logical sort of approach to that. So Steph, thank you for raising that. That's great.

Okay. Can I cross out number 12? Not that it's never going to come back.

It will be back, but Collins impatience is at least somewhat satiated at this point.

Okay. Uh we do not have any new business on the agenda. Uh but we do um have uh organizational business. At the next board meeting, we will be talking about um committees because we have um Mora has left the board and Karen has joined the board. So we'll look at committee assignments. Uh but in the meantime, Mora was also the vice chair of the board, which we would like to get um we would like to get that spot uh taken care of tonight if um I love when we wait until Well, it's only 9:00. It's not bad for these things. Um so, do we have anyone any nominations or anyone interested in vice chair?

Uh Jenny was kind enough to put the the policy around um duties of the chair and the vice chair.

Nobody's like making eye contact. All right, Karen, you're in. No. I'm like, how about me?

I mean, we did put Kelly next to me, so we we didn't want to put poor Karen right here at the front in Mara's spot.

So, I appreciate that. Are you willing to do it?

Okay, I'll nominate Kelly and you can second. Any other nominations?

All right. Then do I have a motion for consideration and approval to appoint Kelly Sink as the vice chair for the RSU5 board of directors to take effect immediately?

Thank you, Colin and Valerie. All those in favor?

None opposed. Congratulations. Thank you. You're welcome.

All right. Um, personnel, we don't have any. As usual, we've driven the public away. Um, and, uh, I would take a motion to adjurnn. Kelly and Cara. All those in favor?

Great. Thank you guys.

============================================================

RSU5 BOARD OF DIRECTORS MEETING TRANSCRIPT
Meeting Date: November 19, 2025
Source File: transcript_2025-11-19_jN4BT2JjG5A.txt
District: Regional School Unit 5 (Freeport, Durham, Pownal, Maine)
============================================================

That's why Yeah, don't touch anything else. It's fine. Great. Perfect.

Good evening. Welcome to the RCU5 board of directors meeting. It is Wednesday, November 19th, 2025. Uh we are here at the Durham Community School and we have a few board members uh that are joining us as soon as they can. Uh Chris will not be with us this evening. Um and we're not sure about our student rep.

So, we will get started in the meantime with the pledge of allegiance.

Okay. So, uh thank you for everyone's flexibility uh in timing. We did add a um a special budget workshop starting well now until our normal uh meeting starts at 6:30. Um just wanted to provide some updates to the board from from the administrative team on where we're at and get some um feedback back to that team as they work on the 2027.

Right. Yes. 2027 budget. So I will hand it over to Tom.

Good evening everybody. Um I'll try to speak up. My voice is bouncing back from a cold. So I hope you can hear me. Okay.

Does that help? Well, how about that? Does that help? Okay, there. Thank you. Um, I also want to thank the administrative team for being here tonight. I think it's really helpful for us all to be in the same room. Um, not only to hear the board's message, but for you to know that we have really been working on this together, and that's part of why I have asked for this meeting. Um, and I really just want to start by grounding us all in the same place with the same facts as we begin working on next year's budget.

So, what we've been able to put together are some of the costs that will impact that budget that we already know about.

And the largest one is contractual obligations for salaries and benefits.

Um, but there are also some increases in required services for special education that are based on specific student needs that presently we are paying for from a reserve account, but as we know that those students will be with us next year, we can't um use a reserve account long term and we will need to build those into the budget.

So adding those things together, that brings us to a projected increase for next year's budget of just under 10%.

If if it's a status quo budget, meaning we don't change any levels of staffing, etc. To be prec the precise number is 9.82%.

So I want to try to put that in context for everybody tonight. Um, for the past two years, uh, the district's budgets have come in at increases hovering around 6%. Last year's approved budget represented a 6.83% increase over the preceding year. Um, the impact to each community varied based on the cost sharing formula of the district. And last year, that 6.83 83 overall percent increase um showed up differently in each town because of that cost sharing formula. Durham saw an estimated 8.83% increase. Freeport saw 4.95% and panel 7.87%.

So again that's last year. It's not possible at this moment for us to look forward and project um estimates for estimated impacts for each town right now um because we still don't have key information especially the state subsidy and possible revenue adjustments that would affect that picture.

So to bring that next year's budget into further context, if we were to bring that projected increase down from almost 10% to something closer to the 6% range, we would be looking at reductions of about $1.8 million.

And that equates to about 17 teaching positions if we measured it in that way. Obviously, teaching positions are not the only thing that make up the budget, but that's a measuring stick that I think is meaningful.

Um, reductions of that scale would absolutely have clear effects on programs and class size and the overall experiences of the district.

So, this is why I've asked you, this is what I'm asking you to consider tonight. Um, the next stages of this process for us in the room are getting into the weeds to actually develop a budget that makes sense. But before we move deeper into it, I feel I really need clear guidance from you about what level of increase you believe is reasonable, responsible, supportable by the community. Um, I cannot, especially as a new superintendent, make that decision all by myself. Um I I need you to to help me with that.

So I also want to look ahead beyond next year. Um if we look ahead to the fiscal year not 27 but 28 um our projections show another if we just kept it at status quo again that increase would be about 8.48%.

And again that does not figure in the next teacher negotiation cycle which would happen in that year for that year. So in other words the pressures that I'm talking about are not limited to just this year.

So we are trying to look at this from all angles. We're trying to look at it responsibly. I believe that the responsible thing is to acquaint you with these facts as we see them and to acquaint the community with these facts as we see them. Um we are also talking seriously about the need to look at long-term solutions that go beyond a single budget cycle.

um we know that there are structural inefficiencies within the district um that we can't really get get at by just trimming around the edges or looking at budgets yeartoyear and addressing those may require us require us require us to examine facilities how we use the facilities how we configure the facilities and whether there are more effective ways to use them. Um we also have the integration of early childhood services which is coming right up. Um that places more urgency behind all of this. So that I think really requires us to look at this as a systems problem not as a building by building problem.

It's also an opportunity to really rethink how we are delivering education across the district. So, with all that in mind, uh, I have two real questions for you tonight that I hope you will consider. I'm not asking for a vote on this. This is not an action item. This is a discussion that I'm hoping from which will emerge a consensus about how to proceed. And the first is what level of budget increase should we plan for as we continue this work. I heard loud and clear when I started here that in last year in particular that that's not a question that was raised and I think I have to raise it now. And then second, does the board support beginning, excuse me, a longer term visioning process that can explore structural changes and potential efficiencies over time.

And your guidance on this will shape this year's budget, but we'll also plan a trajectory forward.

to push the button. Go ahead.

I guess I have a couple of questions before we make a pronouncement about what level of increase is acceptable because clearly I think that depends on a number of factors. Um I'm I I am curious the 9.84% 84% or whatever it was. That's just the contractual obligations plus these new um special education positions.

I'm wondering what other pieces that we need to be considering here. So, let's just start there.

The biggest other piece that we need to consider is that we have not yet negotiated the support staff contract.

We're about to do that. Um, I would hope that we can negotiate that within and have a new contract ready to go into effect for next school year, but um, that will be a factor for sure. Um, Kelly, I might have to ask you to help me out with that one. This one, we we have an estimate for health insurance, correct?

So we actually do not have an estimate for health insurance and what we have in is an estimate for support staff negotiations.

Um the our health insurance uh in our collective bargaining agreements we pay based on previous year premium amounts.

The employer's contributions is a percent based on previous year. So because we are in currently in 2526 budgeting for 2627 the um health insurance numbers are fixed for this year in the in the uh process uh pending negotiations right obviously for the ESP that is coming up sports staff. um the uh where we estimated the health insurance Tom was when we were looking at a a projected number for next year for I mean for the following year which would be 2728 we had to build in right an estimated number there because it's not known.

So um the 8.61 9.82 does that make any assumptions for general inflation for everything other than staff? Is there sort of like a 2% on supplies or if you're looking at the sheets, it's strictly looking at what we paid for wages last year, wages and benefits against what we what the rollover budget with current staffing is. That's the top number. So it's nothing else.

So that's not 8.61% of the total budget.

It's 8.61% of our wages on just the wages portion of that budget because we don't have any of the other factors.

That's what the the administrative team will be building soon are the remaining uh pieces that go into that um into the ads for the um expenditures for the total expenditures. Okay. We the numbers you're looking at here is just saying with current staffing if we turn it over what was the percent of increase year-over-year with steps and contractual increases.

Correct. And then the second number are additional bodies except for the out of district placement number which is that 165,000 number. The other ones would actually be additional positions that we would be adding. So it felt like we could compare them with previous wages because if you remember last year's budget was a little over 44 million almost 44 and a.5 million.

Um and you can see on your sheet how much is represented in just salaries and benefits in the column to the left.

Okay. So, that was going to be my question was the percentage that wages makes up of so so 36.7 million of 44.5.

Did that answer your question?

Yeah. So I hear us saying we are a big unknown is the support staff negotiations and we haven't really factored in inflation at the very least.

That would be beyond what I just mentioned right here. Yeah.

Yeah. I guess another question I have is um whether or not any inefficiencies have been examined that could be that could adjust like something reasonable that you think we as an as a board might be willing to accept because I know this is very challenging but that would be I guess a question I would ask right away of the administrators.

I feel I can answer that with a broad brush. Right now we do have in mind what we're thinking about are where if we were asked to make reductions where they would be we've developed some criteria to use as a way to guide that. Um I think conceptually we have some areas for that could be reduced in mind but the amount of those and where they would fall would not necessarily be equal across the schools because it really one of our aims would be to try to preserve equity across the schools using things like class sizes, the amount of money spent per kid, the needs of the kids in particular buildings, th those many variables that impact that. Um, I think it's probably too early for me to start mentioning specific areas. Um, but we there are areas where we could find efficiency.

Yeah. This is why this is such a chicken and the egg conversation, right? It's tough. It, you know, a number is a number, but what it means, I mean, I'd love to see a 0% increase.

Obviously, that's not possible without slashing tons of of things that we value. Um, you know, these discussions always come down to is the is the the, you know, weighing both sides of the conversation worth it? Is the cut in whatever we're providing, are we able to make it up somewhere else um to to warrant the reduction in the budget or vice versa?

Is the benefit we're getting worth increasing? Um, you know, it's it's hard to say when we don't know when we know this number. We know this side of the scale, but we don't know what we're either forgoing or not getting or getting rid of as the offsetting balance. I don't know.

But they're all Yeah, the mics are quiet tonight.

How about now? Is mine on? Mine's on.

Apologies. Um, what I was saying was now I feel like I'm too loud.

Is that okay? Um, I was thinking of because of my current situation with light, um, if there is any way to create efficiencies and kind of maybe leverage some work with like I know we have Freeport can, but I'm sure there are other groups in our other towns um, to try to create more environmental impact efficiencies like LED lighting. Um I mean that's the one that comes to mind for obvious reasons. Um to at least net some small wins in our budget.

There are um we have actually there's an energy audit that we're in the second year of implementation of that is is working toward a lot of those things. Um Erica Mateo and I have actually been in communication with what's the name of the organization? green green schools to try to talk about funding that could be available for some of that work. Um, and you know in places that don't affect people, things like supplies, etc. We can certainly look there. I don't think I can sugarcoat it though that if you simply look at the amount of the budget that is wages and salary.

We we are not going to be able to make really substantial changes to that number unless we go to that part of the budget.

And I think it's important to note that the energy audit is really capturing a lot of that stuff already. Like the LED lights is happening this year, right? So that's already we've already captured that.

Um Yeah, that light's still on the list. I think one of the things I noticed when I come came to the district, and I think this is probably a good time to mention it, is that um and and Kelly really deserves a shout out for this. There are several areas in which we have been we are using um fund balance to step into long-term goals that are really saving us money over time and keeping us from having to like tax our way out of an emergency because we are saving for the emergency.

That includes like fleet replace the vehicle fleet replacement, the energy audit and several others. So those are in a situation like this it is always tempting to try to think of what can we defer in those areas.

This district has a really good plan in place to to keep us on the right side of not paying interest on things.

That's a good question. Um so we year one of the energy audit projects are this year. So year two is year one's payment starts. I know we're stepping into some of that. Is it all of that or do we have an increase that we know out of the gate we're going to have for that piece?

So um as if we not all board members are here so we'll just talk about the plan a little bit. Um it was it was a phased four-year plan at least for the energy audit portion. Um we are looking to lease purchase that. Um and we We um put an RFP out and we um actually went with the Bank of America for this um uh 17-year lease purchase for the energy efficiency um pieces. the proposed plan that um this superintendent Gray was referencing last year um I presented to the facilities and the finance committee jointly and then we brought it before the full board where any additional payment that gets pushed into the budget we would um try and offset by utilizing fund balance. And so the projected amount that we were adding to the budget each year um was was about 300,000 if I remember correctly in that in that um area. I think it was like 360 something.

But um the good news is is that the projects came in at a lower cost than we had anticipated. So there will be some slight savings there as I think it was about 60,000. So I'm kind of focusing on that about 300,000 number. But that's one of those outside of the wages and benefits number that we're talking about and there's a plan to help step into that and offset that. Um, and that's why it's it while it's hard to talk about the budget right now and and only look at salaries and benefits and none of the other moving parts because they're not all known yet. It's really about being responsive to a board who last year at the very end of the process said at the beginning of this process I was never asked what an acceptable percentage was what we wanted to see come forward. That doesn't mean that we're not going to tell you what was on that's you know what hit the floor right or what's on the top you know like what we cut or what the proposals were what the asks were. We've always kind of talked about that openly with you all um to say like here are the priority, you know, here are the items that are in and the here are the items that didn't make it. Um, I think this is more we didn't include that number, Michelle, because there is an anticipated revenue offset. Um, and then there should potentially be some savings within the um, electricity article, which we didn't factor in when we were kind of projecting that timeline.

Yeah. I just wanted to make sure there wasn't like a, you know, similar to these special ed numbers that we knew were coming. I didn't want to make sure there wasn't an additional number we knew was coming that we haven't accounted for. So, just for people who like to think sort of globally, um I just did some quick math. So, it looks like 82% of this year's budget was salaries and wages. Um if we look to the 9.82% 82% increase for those pieces and keep everything else the same. Um, you know, it would it looks like it's about an 8% increase to the total budget as opposed to the 9.82 for those two pieces. So, but that means nothing else increases. And I think anybody who's ever gone shopping knows that that's a um to get what you the same things you got, you know, last year, it would cost more money. So just for a baseline that's helpful for me. I figured I'd share if others find it helpful. Cara.

Yeah. I just want to thank you. Is this working?

Yeah. Be close to people. Wow. Really getting close up up and close and personal with these mics. Uh I want to thank you for for the transparency throughout this process and for hearing our feedback. I think it was the retreat in August where we were really open about some of our frustrations with the process and feelings around it and um and so I appreciate the question of what percentage are we comfortable with. It's still a difficult question to answer for sure. It's it's I'm feeling really sad about this information and and what to do with it. So, I just want to acknowledge that I think this is a really tough it's tough to swallow the possibility of losing 17 plus teaching positions. Um, to answer your second question, if I personally would love to see a long-term visioning process to evaluate efficiencies, I think I've in defense of our budget in the past, I've always felt like, you know, there's no greed in the school system. there's no I haven't felt like there's been uh I haven't seen a lot of inefficiencies I guess and if it sounds like there might be and I would love to hear more of that to make me feel better about um about uh passing a budget that's not what we've done before or not what we in general you know we're assuming that 17 teaching positions right now are serving our children in the way that we want them to be served um so I I look forward to more information and more discussion tonight to see if we can come to a percentage some guidance for you.

I guess um everything that everyone's saying that this is really hard and difficult and frustrating but um I guess what drives me to say that is that especially when we look at multiple years is the sustainability of this for our district.

And so when I think of to me I sort of think of the questions in reverse. What is the long-term vision here and if we have a better idea of where we're going where we could get to a better place I think that that might change my answer for the first question. If we have to endure a higher percentage this year but we have a clear understanding of where we're trying to get to for this the district and the taxpayers.

um that feels different to me. Um and just knowing knowing everything we have on the horizon with the early childhood stuff um and we've you know it's been thrown around like the facilities um study as well. To me those things are costs but this isn't sustainable for like it's just not sustainable for us to continue to have to engage in this process year over year. Um and so that's sort of I guess my musing currently.

Yeah. I mean, clearly there's the piece of this that's just, you know, what what what do we value and how much pain are we as a board willing to accept, but there's also kind of the the taxpayer piece and what our taxpayers are willing to that their pain tolerance. Um, and so I'm kind of thinking I'm guessing that this is a problem that's going to be facing a lot of boards and not just ours. Um, and I'm wondering if you've reached out to any of these other boards and talked to them about what their budget process and their percentage is likely to look like because I'm sort of thinking if this number is more normal for budgets across the state of Maine.

This might be more acceptable to our taxpayers than if we were the outlier.

Um, that's a great question. I haven't reached out and right now to any other districts. Um, but I've been through this before and I've been through it in in other several other places. Um, this is a substantial increase. This is, I think, an increase right now. If we don't do anything and we carry forward a status quo budget, it would be an increase that in any community would give pause.

And what I have found useful in looking at these um very complicated situations is ultimately it really does boil down to what is the most robust level of a budget that we can carry forward that our community will bear. And the last thing that any of us needs is for a budget it's like the price is right. You want to get it as close as you can without going over. And if we were to miss the mark and go over and the budget were to fail, it would damage the district. Um it would be far more damaging than having a budget that is lean to leaner than we would want it to be. So that's really where I'm coming from with asking for a number that you as community members feel is responsible to bring to the community. I think actually this is a good opportunity. I I hope that I hope that this will resonate when I say it. I think there's often a there's often a perception that when new school leaders step into their role that they can somehow look brave by advocating for budget cuts.

And I just need to tell you that's not who I am. That is that is not who I am.

Um I do not want to be the person who comes in and advocates decimating a district. And I don't think that's what needs to happen. Um, but I can't I I can't make this anything other than what it is. Um, so what I'm inviting you to think about is how much of an increase would do you feel this community will bear and then I can work with that. I think it's too early to get into because if if we obviously we have ideas in our minds about things we can do to bring this down but if we get into the point of starting to talk about specific ideas that is where we really create anxiety among the staff and it's too early to do that um and the ideas depend on what that what we're aiming for. I think I can say again there are there are ways that we could be more efficient. Um that is not to say that any thing that we currently have does not have value.

Um I can say with integrity that everything we have does have value. Um it really comes down to a question of at this moment what can we afford?

And if we get to the point where we are making reductions, they will have to be made in a way that really looks at criteria we've established.

Where are there where can we preserve studentf facing positions? Where can we continue to meet the needs of the most vulnerable kids? Where can we make sure that class sizes are equitable and follow our policy? Those are some of the big ones.

Yeah, I just want to echo um what Cara said earlier about just appreciating Tom your transparency on this and and appreciate all of our administrators and and uh directors for their help in all of this. Um I think I think I'm just going to own that um I'm uh I mean I think the word has already been used sort of like a frustration.

Um, and I guess what I just sort of want to just say out loud is like I am um it feels like in this conversation we need to do um uh the board needs to own some decisions but the board also needs to ask some tough questions about what we um what we have been told um and what we and assumptions um that we've been operating on that Um we did not think to question.

Um for example um I would assume that in the last negotiation with the uh teachers union um that the scenario plans that our u side ran would have indicated that in two years we would have a $2.2 million increase. Um and that that would have been something that either um influenced the negotiation process or was something that when the the negotiated budget was presented to the board um was articulated clearly. Um because I think sitting here now I don't think at least I mean I'm just going to own that I don't I have no recollection of having a sense that that was the sort of curve um we were on. Um which leads me to a further question which is which is more um which is not our responsibility but is just a in the spirit of of community and communal uh responsibility taking. I'm very curious um how the teachers union um understood this uh negotiation process. If this was understood um that there would be a $2.2 million increase this year. Was were the um was the leadership there um conscious that that might be leading to a 17 uh potentially 17 positions being cut um because of the uns unsustainability um of that. Um, again, I'm I'm saying all of that not that there's any any particular um entity to to blame or uh um but just more of I guess a a frustration with um uh I don't want to I'm not interested in blaming anything in the past, but I think also understanding how we got to this place I think is um important um in some way in terms of understanding what visioning um process is like. Does that make any sort of sense?

It does. I there's not much of that that I can answer for for two reasons. One, I wasn't here when it was negotiated. And two, any of the conversations that happened in negotiations would be confidential. Could be discussed in executive session from people who were here, but I I wasn't here. Um I have had conversations recently with the leadership of the union. Um those conversations are also confidential but I I feel I can say that they have been productive and the spirit that I've been met with has been one of it has not been acrimonious. It's been these are the facts we have to deal with them. Um certainly the contract is a public facing document. So, um, the the amounts of increase over the next two years, if anybody had really wanted to go in with a calculator and look at them, I I can't imagine they weren't discussed at the time. Um, I think it's and I I'm I'm sure there are many staff members watching this right now. So, I I do want to say to them something that I have said when I went to listening sessions.

um this information can cause the sense of it being the fault of the teachers for having generous raises and it isn't.

Um I I would like to say publicly I I have no problem with the raises that our teachers got. Um that's a way that we are investing in the district. We have we're in a competitive place where we have other districts around that is that is not that teachers don't need to feel that it's their fault for getting raises that are competitive. Um at a certain point it just comes up against the overall picture and there's only one pot of money and it's coming out of all the local taxpayers and that's where we have to make decision. That's a decision that was made a couple years ago. Now we have to keep up with it somewhere. I hear where you're coming from. It's It must be bewildering to you.

Well, and just to be clear, yes, and I think that's exactly also where I'm coming from in terms of the um uh I mean, I'll just speak for myself that I have been um Yeah, I've been fully in support of of um of uh giving our teachers what they what they deserve and they should they should be getting paid more. Um absolutely. And so I think that's again part of I think I think that's probably weirdly I think that's probably what feeds the frustration is I think a sense that um uh at least I think the board has been has been quite supportive at least I'll say this as someone who is outside of the negotiating body um but when those um when those contracts are brought to us they feel like they feel like they are fair they and they feel like they are they are meeting the needs of that are that asked for by the by the teachers which again I think that's as it should be. um but um also math.

So I think um and what and what I mean by that is to say like it's not like it's it's not mag it's not magical and it also doesn't hide um and so I think that trying to understand um yes again and I I don't I really do not think that I'm not suggesting that and I was not saying all of that those were rhetorical questions I was not asking that to try to understand it but more to say um like should we have a should how did you how did you phrase it should we have strategic visioning process for for this. Yes. Yes, we should. Another uh conversation that I had with the union leaders that it just sort of I think is another uh other people being in the same place that you are when confronted with this information is a process that we have to go through every year is going through the seniority list because the seniority list is what impacts if there are ever reductions how those reductions get made by the contract.

It became clear in those conversations that nobody had ever really looked at those seniority lists until this year.

And the reason is because historically there hasn't been a worry about reductions.

So you're all you're in new territory.

This district has not been in this place and that's really uncomfortable.

Yeah. I mean, one of the things that Kelly mentioned um when she said, you know, in terms of transparency and what hits the cutting room floor, as they say, um I remember my very first uh time I got on the board almost 13 years ago. I joined in April, like m smack dab in the middle of the budget season, and that was the question they were talking about. And I feel like since that time we, you know, it it's not what did we cut per se. It was what didn't we add. We have been in a period of adding programming and teachers and supports and and that's all wonderful, right? The the ability to do that within the parameters of what our our taxpayers can bear is a good place to be. And we were also in a a place where we had growing enrollments over that time which a lot of districts in the state did were not lucky to be having. So that masked I think a fair amount of um of some of that sort of catchup that that you're mentioning. Um you know I I can tell you um I knew what the contract was going to tell us. Um, I feel like we shared that, but clearly not well enough. Um, but you know, there's so many there's so many moving parts when you're doing a three-year contract. You know, the number of kids today, the number of kids then, the valuation of the towns, like there's so many moving parts. It's really difficult to say, you know, this is going to be the impact of this contract three years in the future, right? Um, three plus years because you're doing it in the year before, right? Um, so that is that is just one of the natures of the beast, I guess, um, for for negotiating a contract like that. So some of that you kind of have to put aside and really try to just negotiate in good faith, right? Like what do we think is fair? What can we what can we offer to keep our our incredible teachers here in this district? And that's what we did. Um, you know, so we are we are kind of at a turning point where some districts were several years ago. Um, and to your point, Kelly, like two or three years ago, there were several districts that were in the sevens and eights and we weren't. We were in the, you know, four, five, and sixes. So, you know, maybe we're just feeling the pain a little bit later than everyone else because our, you know, our curve of student counts and those sorts of things were different. Um, but these are conversations we need to have and we need to be able to find efficiencies and you know the idea of a a more strategic long-term plan. I completely agree staff like if I can get behind sort of a short-term increase that might feel unsustainable but for one year to know that we're on the other side we have a plan to bring that back in line with you know what what we consider sustainable.

Um, but you know, six and sevens and eights and nines um is not sustainable year-over-year.

Michelle, can I just I want to just make sure just because things can get lost in conversation. I am not recommending cutting 17 teaching positions. I am trying I used a 10% increase in terms of teaching positions just so people could envision what that means. But I am not recommending that we cut 17 teaching positions, right? Because I mean that gets you back to the arbitrary number of where we were last year, right? I mean that's just how you got that, right? So, you know, you have to start somewhere. You have to look at something, right? Um Oh, everybody's hand just went up. Uh Danielle, um so two things. So, I'll I'll say that I I love when we talk about us being as a community, but we are three communities as one district. And I think the three communities are on different um positions as far as the increase. I I I don't think we've ever been together as one in as far as how the the budget goes. And I worry that this just will continue to split the communities even more going forward. So I I don't know how we come up with a number of course that makes everybody happy. That's my one thing. Um, two, I know I'm just wondering is there so Michelle figures out this other number and okay, 8% is what you said, Michelle.

Um, is there something really big out there that we have to take on this year that's gonna shift that number even more that you could share with us or do you think there's some big project or the biggest the biggest thing is that we have to take on early childhood. Um, but the we don't have to take on early we don't have at some point we do within the next few years. Um, and I will talk more about that later tonight, but the there's a separate stream of funding that is to pay for those needs. So, that should be based on the asurances we have from the state, which I'm going to take their word at the moment, um, should be neutral to our budget, at least in the short term.

Yeah. For this year. For this year, but could affect us again. That's part of that long-term planning, which I 100% think I I agree with Stephanie. I think if if we could somehow have that plan and maybe then show that to the community, I think we'd have more people maybe behind us. But I think coming with this, no, I think Durham is unfortunately not going to be behind it.

And it's not because they're not supportive of the schools, but it's a very unreasonable ask at this point in time.

Yeah. I I am also 100% in support of a long-term strategic plan to get this number back into a what we consider reasonable territory. But I also worry that if we just leave things status quo right now and we look into next year, we're going to be facing the same conversation again.

So I I don't know how comfortable I feel just leaving it at almost 10% which is really 8%.

So last spring we spent a we we got to a point where we asked what would it look like what would the reductions look like if we were looking at a 6% budget or 7% budget increase. Would it be unreasonable to ask you to bring forward what 4% looks like what 5% looks like?

What 6% looks like? So yes it's unreasonable.

No it's not unreasonable. you're you're talking about tears. Um, and that has been something that I have experienced in the past and no, that's not unreasonable.

Thank you for asking that Cara because that's kind of what I was thinking as I'm I'm thinking about a number and it's right now I think it's really hard to say what is a comfortable number and what's not and seeing what different levels mean different numbers meaning what positions what things would be reduced I think would be really helpful um as we think about this I guess I just also I when I was on my phone I wasn't texting I looking up the the Durham election results and so we I guess in just in terms of the question of what can the taxpayers bear we know that Durham voted that they could not bear the the increase last year at 9% right so we know that there's that right um and so you know it's we're we know we're close so I think that that's just worth stating that we were close last year right and to Danielle's point the the tension that that that creates because of the disparities and percentages that hit each town is another complexity that we're all looking at. But we know that voters in Durham didn't support the budget last year.

And I'm just going to take this opportunity to point out that one of the reasons that Durham's went up almost 9% versus the 6.83 for the whole district was because G Durham continues to grow, right? So Freeport is essentially a minimum receiver. Um, and Powell is close, right? They're getting closer and closer. Um, Durham still gets a fair amount, three to four million a year, uh, in subsidy. Um, but as Durham's property values increase, that goes down, right? So, what that means is the minimum required from the state goes up.

So regardless of what we do to the if we did a 0% budget increase, Durhams would still go up because the t the state historically for the last several years has been saying you can bear more. So when we look at it and say, you know, oh um you know, well, six seems reasonable, but six turns into nine and now nine probably turns into 12 and um you know, I mathematically speaking, I understand where they're coming from. Um, and maybe this comes back to how we communicate to to the communities. I can I can tell you for a fact that is not how it feels when you're talking in the community and they see, geez, why is our tax increase twice as big as as some of some of the other towns in the district. I can explain the math to them, but that doesn't change how they feel about it.

But just a reminder that the for new members and folks watching at home, I mean the budget is a district budget.

Um, you know, it's not a has to pass in every town, has to pass in twothirds of the town. Like it is a straight up and down yeses versus nos. And I and I I'm hesitant to I mean I understand the dynamic in the district on why this causes anxiety but you know I work in scar bro they fail their budget oh pretty regularly and they're all just one town right like they still can't agree they're all on the same tax base they all have the same requirements for their tax and they you know they still struggle to come up with a budget that they can support that supports the needs of the kids so I don't think this is you know strictly an RSU five issue. I don't think this is strictly a RSU issue. I think this happens in municipality districts as well. Um but just want to throw that out there. Welcome, Anna.

Right into the right into the thick of it.

I was watching on live stream, but um sorry to be late.

You weren't driving and watching, were you?

It was on Bluetooth. Everyone had a nice radio voice. Perfect.

Who does, Tom? because I I'm sensitive to the feedback that I got at the beginning of this year that last year when you went through this, you didn't get satisfactory explanations of why. Um I'm really trying to meet that need.

I think that that the the why is in the numbers and once we and then there's another level of why which will be once we get some guidance here tonight it'll be all right team where are we going to go with that and how are we going to bring it overall into line but how are we going to spread that across all of the different cost centers and schools and that will be another level of why that we'll have to explain at that time I do think a note a note of optimism.

These will be hard decisions.

You you don't have to decimate your schools. You you don't have to decimate your schools. You can still make responsible choices here tonight and have very strong wellsupported schools.

Um it probably just needs to look different than it does right now.

Yeah. I think the idea about you know the more long-term vision um to me is is about how do we deliver right so we deliver it in a certain way now are there different ways we could deliver the education that's different but still good that you know that might be more cost-effective right I mean we have a variety of class sizes across the district for the same age levels we have you know there's just there's other ways that we could potentially be delivering education that is, you know, beneficial and productive and effective, but you know, might be more cost-effective. And I think that is what you're asking about our willingness to consider. And I think we have to consider it because I don't think 10% is sustainable over time. And I don't think we're going to go into our next negotiations and be like, "Sorry guys, 2% that's all we got." um you know it just seems you know a lot of all of these factors we're facing do not seem short term so we have to come up with a different way I don't know how comfortable I feel giving a number tonight having just so very little grasp of all of the details and all the moving parts but what I wonder is as we're going into the budget process and we're hearing from the administrators if they could give us some of the information about how a teacher reduction say would impact their schools so that we kind of have that grasp of okay if we cut here this is what it would look like.

I I understand why that question comes forward. We really can't do that tonight and it's just because Oh, not tonight.

Okay. Well, we certainly can at in the process, but I do need to put it into context that the administrators normally would be bringing their budgets to me by next week and we are have that on hold because we really need the guidance tonight and we now I've deferred those to December 10th which is before the next board meeting and if I don't get a good sense of a number tonight, I'll have to make up a number.

I'm sorry.

Yeah, I guess um you know I'm going to push people who felt like they weren't asked last year what number was palatable and it doesn't everyone's rights are reserved and obviously it's going to depend on you know what that looks like from from the team whether that is amendable or not but you know the board asked for this and they're giving us the opportunity to provide it.

I think we need to provide it.

So I was kind of what I said before, but I wanted to add of like a four I'd like to see a 4% a 5% 6% what that would look like. Um but to what was just said earlier I think in the presentation of those it would be really nice to not necessarily see I guess in a different way I would like to see how the students needs will continue to be met. So, not necessarily how the schools will be harmed by the reductions, but how will we know that the students needs will continue to be met because I I think Michelle you had said that Scarboro has managed to, you know, eventually go back and and make cuts and the students needs are still being met or something along those lines. And I think we that's a a question we might have to ask. We we we want to know how how are these students needs still going to be met?

I think that's a completely fair question. It it may be helpful for me to say this answers perhaps a bit more.

We have I I said earlier that we don't have anything that has no value right now. We are getting value out of every position. We do have any number of things in the district that don't fall into the category of mustave but fall into the category of nice to have. And that that's where we would need to look and that's how we would need to prioritize.

No. Yeah. So, I almost feel like we should throw the question back on you since you have the information that we don't have or some of it at this point.

And that is, you know, clearly you don't know what the taxpayers will bear, but you have a sense of maybe what cuts we could make without um impacting our students significantly.

I think um My recollection of part of the problem last year was that it wasn't um it wasn't I think yes the oversimplified way of of explaining some of the some of the um what went arry um was that this the the phrase we were never asked for a number.

I think that that is that was said that was said absolutely. The other thing that was said was that it was never it was never made clear how and I guess this is where I'm just I'm really maybe this is also the frustration. I think we asked really plainly, explain to us how these how these proposed reductions um uh why they are necessary in terms of meeting the needs of the students or how will you to to the to the question that that Cara just asked, how will you continue to meet the needs of the students um with these reductions? And um my recollection was that what we were told which again I I on the one hand totally appreciate on the other hand um I'll own the frustration with is just is that like we'll figure it out and that was not um in recollection like as I look back on that I was like I don't like that was fundamentally I think where um where at least part of where I was coming from in that process of of saying let's cut these positions in order to keep us around a number that um that I think we were looking at in historical context and we were taking into consider and was very much taking into consideration the the question of uh the composition of the three towns. Um but uh we weren't able to have a clear conversation about that. So I think that I don't know. So, I think that uh I think that to to to Cara's point and to your point, Kelly, I think the like um I'll come out with this another way.

uh as we have discussed before and as has infuriated uh some of our um uh members of our community um when we say that our legal obligation is to the needs of the students.

Um and that is who we are here to serve.

Um and yes, we do that um with the with the help of the teachers. We do that with the help of the community. We do that help the taxpayer. But our obligations are to the students. Um, legally, we're elected to do that. Um, so I think that's probably what I will I guess what I would I would say to you is to say um uh if we let's say we we give you a number and say I don't know we say eight instead of uh eight total, right?

um to say all right like to to to Cara's point how do how do we meet the needs of the students on that and and can we and can you honestly tell us that we can and if not then say we can't um because again there also is a a fair bit of conversation there has been a fair bit of conversation about um uh who should be trusted um with with the um not with the decision-making but with the rationale right and I think that I I think um historically the board has been very inclined to say that the teachers and the administrators are the experts in understanding what the what the curriculum should be, what the best way to e to educate our children are. Um and we trust that. So I think that also I think that is also I think where I'm coming from in this is to say I think I think we should I think you're absolutely right. We should give you a number, but I think you we should as part of that say tell us what the impact of that is and do you think that as an educator do you think that's fair or not? Because if you come back and say you've told us to do eight, we can't do it. It has to be 8.3. I'll be like fantastic. Let's we'll we'll figure out a way to communicate that to our community um who are responsible for the young people.

I can tell that LA I know that last year you did not get a good rationale a satisfactory rationale.

I think it's I definitely think it's my job at this point whatever I bring forward to give you a rationale. Um I can tell you right now if you if the number is eight we can do that. We can do that without gutting the institution.

Would oh probably I need to come up here. If the number is eight, we don't have to gut the institution. We'll have to make some hard choices, but we can still definitely meet the needs of kids.

If the number is two, um, that's very painful. That's changing the nature of the school system. Could you meet the requirements of the law? Probably. Could you have the schools that you're proud of that you want your kids to go to? No.

Um, I can give you that level of detail right now. What I really can't ethically do right now is well certainly we have contingency ideas that we have discussed. I have ideas in my mind but the minute I start going into specifics about any of that I'm putting people into a state of anxiety about will it be me, will it be my children's teacher?

And that's not fair to do right now.

And I don't think that's what you're asking. And to be clear, I don't and I just can we all just say as a board, I don't think any of us are asking for that right now. I think like I think just to be clear, I don't think that that would not be fair of us and we would be jerks.

So, could I could I I also think I mean this was somewhat implied but let me be more explicit with it. To get the number down to six right now by saying to get the number down to six it would require 17 teaching positions. That is me saying that's a big cut. Can we do it? I mean we can. It wouldn't necessarily show up as 17 teaching positions. it would show up as positions and supplies and some of this and some of that, but that's a lot. So, but if your sense is looking at this data that we can't we've got to keep it in line with previous years because otherwise could voted down, then that's them's the facts and we'll we'll do the best we can with it. Um to get it down to a 6% increase would be a lot right now.

So, can I ask is it a lot in the framework of how we do it today or is it just a lot? I mean, is there a different way to do it that could get us to something like that? And and maybe it's like, yeah, we could, but it's not going to happen in six months, nine months. It takes longer than that. Um, you know, I'm thinking about, you know, when Glenn presented to us and we were talking about sort of, you know, doing the the mapping of the buildings and like the use of the space and, you know, are we are we maximizing the facilities that we have and um, you know, maybe that's a longer that's a longer term play on how to try and tackle some of these challenges. Um, or is it like, yeah, no, six in in the most efficient use of every person in every building we have is still a huge huge issue.

It's it's pretty big.

Yeah. Okay. So, you know, when I hear Cara say, you know, she'd like to see four, five, and six, I mean, that's like huge and then even bigger, right? So, maybe that's I don't know, maybe that is the number that you're interested in.

Um, you know, so we were close to seven last year. Um, it did pass. not in every town, but it did pass. Um, you know, h how do people feel like something like a six, a seven, and an eight, right?

And then we will have hopefully by the time we're looking at those, we'll have some more information about subsidy.

We'll have and we we'll have the ability to look at impact as well.

Kelly, Steph, go ahead.

Uh I guess I just want to state that we it's our responsible responsibility to make the call of what we want to send to the taxpayers but there's a guess here for us too. We don't know right what will happen in an election. So, I just want to name that. And um also that I I think that's kind of I'm I'm happy to say a number uh as well even though it feels scary, but I think the 678 um feels like uh reasonable given what you're telling us would be substantial. Uh, and knowing what happened in the election last year, I feel like that range would give us places to discuss that would be boundaries and guard rails. Um, and then maybe we would be able to have more of a discussion that Kelly, I think, is looking for, which is I need to know more specifics before I can give you a number. So, that's my thought.

So to be clear, we're talking about a year-over-year increase with just the wages and benefits in these positions of 8% right here. So this is not really cutting a lot. I mean, of course, there's going to be inflation and some other factors that are going to enter the picture that are going to influence this 8%.

But actually, 8% wouldn't be a huge reduction in staff. It's my understanding, right?

Correct.

And I I just want to say it out loud that um my take on last year just as it relates to the administrator. I I didn't feel like I wasn't given the information I needed. I felt like I understood. I mean, we asked the question and they came back with sort of the how it would work and what it looks like and how we can deliver on what has been asked of you to deliver to the kids. Um, and so I I everybody has a different number in their head. Everyone has a different level of detail they're looking for in an explanation. I totally understand and respect that. And we need to get people to at least a a minimum level of of comfort with what we're presenting. And um you know I I just I just want to say that I didn't I didn't feel like I didn't have the information I was needed. I don't want you to feel like it was just like here's the number, take it or leave it. That that's I know you've watched some of the meetings so you know that's not what happened. But um I I I just feel like I would be remiss if I didn't say that.

I think if I I'm asked to do tiers, which is totally reasonable, um that will change a bit of the process about how I roll out the budget to you from what it has been. And this is also something the team and I have discussed.

Um in the past, you've had an initial presentation from the superintendent and then you've had presentations from agent administrator.

There's a strong sentiment among us that that actually ends up to u that that ends up inadvertently pitting schools against schools and that we would like to presented as just the superintendent's budget and that in subsequent meetings when typically you would have heard of from individual schools it may make sense to take those meetings and look at tiers. Here's what the budget looks like at 6%. Here's what it looks like at 7% and 8%. The administrators will still be there to be able to answer questions about their individual areas, but it will I will be the mouthpiece. There will still be a few programs that are kind of different that we would present individually like school nutrition, um, like community programs, which are just kind of a different beast. Um, I hope that makes sense the way I'm explaining it. You're quiet.

How about now?

Okay. Um I know something that I'm mindful of from last year as a spectator um is that we did try to cut one program to legal minimum and had quite the outcry as it not meeting the needs. So I think that's something that I would like to be mindful of of legal minimum maybe isn't our goal always um if there's a value ad to be a little bit above it um for some of the more tailored programs and I think this approach where we're not necessarily um doing such a granular view of these are the very specific places that we're going to cut um makes it a lot less scary on the from a a board member and also I think I hope from a employee standpoint of oh that's me they're talking about. I mean it will get there eventually.

Yeah. I I just if it gets that granular I do hope that we're able to hear if there is value add on something that we're maybe looking at because um legally legal minimum isn't always going to serve the kids in the best way.

We did have a conversation about uh by by we I mean the central office administrators.

I don't think this is a district that sees itself as just scraping by with the minimum in in any area. And that's a point of pride and it should be that way. when we get to any of these decisions, it will always be though up against okay so this or that and I I feel I need to try to be able to explain that and even if I come forwards with something that you disagree with and change that's fine. I'll do my best to explain the reasoning behind the initial proposal.

Yeah, it's interesting. We were talking about this in the curriculum committee today and something about the language of meets the minimum, it just sounds really awful. Um, and I don't think that's who we are.

Yeah, it's not who we are. And so I think whenever we hear that as the board, it's like, oh no, you know, we need more support. And um, I just know I mean I've only gone through the budget cycle once last year, but one thing that felt really tricky was when you when you're just thinking of things to keep from the people who show up at the meeting because it's really not fair.

Um and and it connects with meeting the minimum because sometimes there might be a case to understand from leadership why meeting the minimum is actually good enough and it actually is strong. Um, I think that's just important for us to remember as we go through that because when I think of the meetings last year, what I remember is just a lot of conflict and like feeling pulled in multiple ways of like, well, we're hearing this and then we're hearing that and what's true and who can we trust.

Um, and so if we can, and I like what someone was saying earlier before I got here about the strategic plan for the budget. I think that's a mustave. But I'd really encourage us and personally I want to do this is to try to take a higher level view of it. Um I just think that's really important because otherwise we're really pulled in ways that are actually biased and not equitable and not uh we're not guided by the wisdom of people who really know more than us.

Yeah. And I think um you know I hope one of the the ways it can be different specifically around that Anna this year is the listening sessions you did with the staff in in all of the in all of the schools. So you know like what do we do really well? What do we want to protect?

What's really important to us? I mean you know I I struggle with the we want to do what's absolutely best for kids because I mean it'd be great if all of our classes were 15 kids, right? But that's not feasible. Um if unlimited funds maybe it would be but so we have to be able to like weigh the what's what's Kelly what's the EPS for the district what's the essential programs and services roughly 28 28 million something like that okay so when we think about the minimum according to the state about about $28 million for our budget we are at $44 million we are going well above and beyond what the state says it costs to educate an individual child because we feel like it's important to have extracurriculars and co-curriculars and reasonable class sizes and and you know all of these things for our kids. So, um I I you know I just want to I just want to point out that the the the minimum and I and just um for your for your perspective Valerie I I don't believe we were going to the minimum with what was proposed last year. We did decide and I was supportive of it too like you know expanding it back up but we weren't even going to the minimum at that point right so um you know hopefully we can take the learning from what we heard from the staff right and use that when the you know Tom and the administrators are working on this budget to say you know this is what we feel is really important this is what the staff feels is really important how can we honor all of those things and meet these tears right and then maybe we avoid the well they say this is just fine and this group says this not just fine. Like who do we trust?

It might be a good moment for me to talk about what we've done with that feedback from the staff. Um unapologetically used AI to take all of the data from the survey and also from the listening sessions and summarize that and then to extract themes from it. I like using AI for that because it means my judgment is not the one doing it. Um then the team looked at it and we also went through the same listening se session exercise among ourselves with the same questions which were what strengths do we preserve what are our challenges where should we grow and where can we find efficiency and then we matched our administrative team's answers up against the staffs there was actually a lot of alignment um not surprisingly the administrative team tended to have a more global view when they discussed these things and staff members, you know, we are paid to have the global view. So, um, this the concerns that staff members brought forward tended to be more building specific, but that also shows up in the results. I shared all that back with the staff just this over this past weekend.

And then we used all of that again to extrapolate the themes that should guide our decision- making. Like some of those are okay preserving equity among the schools. Um making sure that the kids who have the most needs are have those needs met. Uh preserving uh studentf facing positions to the greatest degree possible. And there was a whole list of them. But that I think kind of anchors us to be able to go forward when we have our when we make our tough decisions, the six, seven, and eight, and apply them against the criteria that are informed by in part by what the staff told us is important to them. Um, so it's not a it's not a wish list of what the staff told us they want. It's it's applying the values that came through it.

And my hope is that that type of ownership in the process can help people feel better about decisions that are made. Now, it's never easy when it results in a cut in your school, your program, your whatever. Um, but if you know that sort of these these were the values that were used to make decisions and these were the criteria that everything was considered under, um, maybe we get more buyin from everybody. Hong.

Yeah, I guess just uh two things. First quickly, I think I mean maybe goes without saying, but the um when we're presented with the 678, if that is what we're we're talking about, I think um to Stephan's pointing uh before that the more of the vision and sort of and sort of strategic structure because I think that then if we're having a conversation about like and here's how 6% fits into that, here's how 7% fits into that. And I think also as part of that again and again the I don't want to um let me just say I think it would be helpful to know with each of those um percentage increases and what they like the granularity of that what that means for the coming years um with with the question marks in terms of of negotiations. I think second I guess I would just ask you Tom um as much as you feel comfortable doing this um I guess I'm conscious of just uh of being in a um of being in a cultural and political moment where uh taking responsibility for things is not necessarily um uh something that is done. Uh, I think I guess what I would ask you is, um, first, what are the questions that we're not asking you that we should be asking you? Um, and what is it that you would also say to us that we don't understand um, that the staff and the administrative team um, need us to understand uh, in terms of our um, the role we play and the leadership that we provide. Can I take the second question first?

Um, I think that this team and like throw a spitball at me if I get this wrong.

U, I think that we need you to know that we've worked really hard at this already and we have been really collaborative about it and there are smart people who care in that room. And what I have found is something that I have not found everywhere I've worked. It is not a competitive environment. We don't have administrators in that room vying with each other to try to get as much for their own school as possible.

We have people who see the big picture and who who care about the kids and the staff. Um and then another part about it that I this is just for me. Um, I am reminded of when I was a principal and I was having to explain a really dysfunctional dynamic that was happening on the school board to my staff and it was at the first staff meeting of the year. And um, I won't go into the details of what it was, but it was something that was having a a real impact on the culture of the district.

And it did involve board members not really understanding the impact of their the things they said in public. And I just started the staff meeting by saying, "Okay, folks, there's an expression. I won't use the word, but is something flows downhill.

We know what the word is. Um, please, you can Google it. Um, that really is true. And the board is everything from you is downhill and all of us down below you in the hierarchy then have to be in the role of catchers because at the bottom is kids. So your willingness to tackle this is really hard but it means that it is less it it just makes it better for the families and kids that we serve.

So, um, and what was your first question, Colin? Questions we're not asking, right?

Questions you're not asking. uh that is not a problem with this group.

But I do think once we get into a specific like once we're ready to bring forward the specific proposals I think that you should ask I won't say grueling but very pointed questions about why this and not that. what how does that decision align with the values that are I am going to approach us by articulating values first that tends to be the way I approach decisions and I'm going to start my presentation with that and then I'm going to try to to tell you how the decisions we've made align with those and then it's up for debate. Um but I think that you should hold my feet to the fire about explaining the values behind the decisions. Yeah, absolutely.

I really appreciate that. And again, just al I hope to to be very clear. I I in in no way um I was doing the exact opposite of suggesting that our administrators were not uh providing leadership. That's exactly what they are doing. What I am what I was asking for was to say um how is it that we as a board are not are are failing? That was that was the the spirit of my question.

just to be clear that that that's where I think that's the that's the responsibility that I'm talking about and that's what I want us as a board to to own and to um and be uh be open to moving forward just to be very clear. If I invoke so my wife is a school social worker um and if I invoke language she uses all the time you're you don't I really would encourage you not to think of you having failed in this because you haven't I think last year I wasn't here but I think what happened was you didn't get a satisfactory answer to really important questions and you wanted to preserve education for your kids and you took action that did that inadvertently.

It It has made the financial problem, which probably wasn't as clear to you as it could have been, bigger this year. So now we just need to not make it bigger in the future.

Yeah. Yeah, and I just want to express appreciation for the fact that we're trying to finesse this process so that we really do get a lot of input from our fac from our staff and our administrators early and often in this process so that their input and their values and um our goals can guide us in this process early. I think that was one of the issues that we faced last year and I I think I feel really good about how we're approaching this and I'm feeling confident that we can maybe not end up in the same place where we were feeling tugged around a lot at the very last minute. So I appreciate that. Thank you.

Um so I just want to revisit the tears again. I know we're we need to wrap up soon too. Um, I would be psyched if if our district voters would pass an 8% budget. Um, based on last year's process, there was a fight to get the 6.8% and as Stephanie pointed out, Durham did not pass that. So, I'm I'm wondering why we're asking for an 8% option again or I'm just curious if the board is all on bored with that or if we want to look at like a are we just going 67 or you're welcome all you you're fired middle school six someone please three tiers are would be great maybe they're not 1% increments maybe they're five or 1.5% increments or something I'm curious what other board members are thinking for numbers I think only a couple of us have mentioned ranges Daniel, I'm going to throw out that I would prefer a number similar to last year and maybe seven at the most.

I was, as I was thinking about numbers, I was thinking five, six, seven.

Getting thumbs up from Valerie. 567. No mic, so thumbs up works. I guess I'd like to see 7.5.

I think can I also say that we could also if if we're really unhappy with that seven or 7.5 or whatever we go we can do what we did last year which is right advocate for more more stuff I guess I would say I I don't want to do what we did last year I wasn't a part of it I just watched it but I don't think that that was best for our district um and when I say you know I we could look at five um I guess when I say six eight. I'm looking at 17 teachers, right? That's six, right?

Yeah. Do we want Do we want to go below that, right? I don't I don't So, it's uncomfortable, but that's why I go to question two of what what does this look like long term, right? Could we get to eight if there was a really strong case to be made for for change? If it's eight this year and we have a long-term vision of how it's not going to be eight again, I'm okay with that. It's very uncomfortable.

People aren't going to be happy, but I think that there's a message there that's important for the students.

T Yeah, I think I guess the way I'm thinking about it is um is itsformational.

Well, I guess it's the same thing. The reason I think six, seven, eight makes sense is because we kind of already know what six is um in terms of just in terms of just staffing, right? So, no, we don't know the granularity of that, but we know and and we and Tom has already said that that is not a like that that is a that is a huge that is a huge cut.

Um and so I think to understand um the scenarios I guess that's more how maybe I would think about it rather than tears is sort of scenarios of like what does six look like from a staffing perspective or what does six look like in terms of meeting the needs of the students and what does that mean what is the staffing implication of that? What does 7% mean in terms of meeting the needs of the students and what are the staffing what are the staffing um implications of that? Again, if we're looking at that in a larger sort of visioning point of view, again, I think that's going to make more sense. I guess I I mean, I'll I guess I'll just be um the outlier or I guess I'll just sort of like mark the I guess for the sort of 8% uh again, I think that's on the one hand that's that is sort of meaningless. on the other hand, it's a way of saying um uh let I don't want us to be um I think it's very cynical for us to be scared of our community um and scared that they are not going to support um the the education of our young people. Um I don't I don't want to be part of that uh that way of thinking. Um, so I that's no way saying let's not exist in reality and let's not like look hard at things.

Um, but I just don't think again that's not um that's not a district that I want to be part of. Um, and it's not something that I can't look across the room at Moon if you were to look at me in the eye. I can't look at Moon in the eye and say that is a that's appropriate. Um, it's not. So I think that like to be just to be really clear of like what is scen what is it what is the scenario around six? What is a scenario around seven? What's a scenario around eight? So that we can then with straight face say to our community when we are advocating for one of those. This is what we think that means and have the courage of our convictions on that. I was up at the state house today with a group of students and we got to meet with um uh Senator Dory and also representative Saxs and at one point in a very passing uh very passing moment um Representative Melanie Sachs said uh sort of approprio of nothing at the moment but she said um she said a budget is a moral document. it is.

And I got out my copy of Herodotus, which I was carrying around because that's what I'm teaching. And I wrote that down in that. And then I asked her to follow up on it. And I just like I've been thinking about that ever since. And I think that's where um I think just be let's be really clear what we're talking about. Um that and again there are and there are moral questions on each side of that. There moral questions in terms of the impact that that has on the on the communities from a financial perspective. And then there's moral impact in terms of the lives um of Moon and the other students uh in this district.

Yeah. I guess to kind of piggyback on that thought, um if we're thinking about tiers and sort of what our basement is, we're thinking six, seven, eight. You're telling us that 6% is 17 positions. That seems pretty extreme to me. And I just want to know, do you like is this something realistic that we should honestly even consider at this point if we're thinking of tiers or or is like seven seven and a half eight more sort of the range that would be realistic for us to consider in terms of meeting the needs of our students?

Uh I think a a 6% increase is significant cuts that would change things for sure.

Can can it be done? Yes, it would it would change things and I do think it would have a detrimental impact on kids.

Um the level of negative impact on kids is you know inversely proportionate to the the the level of the cuts. So um is that always true though? That's I guess my question is is you know one of the reasons that that the six is interesting to me is because I wonder if it forces different ideas to come up right because if we just say eight you're like great move everybody forward you know it it doesn't it doesn't instill a level of discipline to consider what else is possible what other way could you accomplish something um I do appreciate that you've you've said that I do think as I look at certain certain cost centers. There are ways of doing it that there are places where we're actually spending more than we need to spend and we're not getting the best results for kids and there are few places where we could not only be more efficient but at the same time get a better result for kids and do it within this budget cycle. I don't want to go out on a limb and say what they are right now, but I there are some places where I see that could happen.

Am I okay?

Yeah. Okay. Um I'm wondering if maybe we if six sounds super painful if we do 6 and 1/2 7 8 or 6 and 1/2 7 and 1/2. I I feel like having I mean in addition to Michelle's point of the power of creative thinking um I also think while the taxpayers are not our primary concern there's still a level of concern and it's worth at least looking at how painful that really is so that when we go to them we can say we looked at this six and a half we we or we looked at the six because we knew it was going to be painful, but once we looked at it, we realized it wasn't it wasn't anything that we could be we could bear with our students. Um, I think that's healthy.

I think it's worth that that kind of hard look.

I think what I'm hearing I think as sort of like reading the room, I'm hearing somewhere in the middle is the seven number. And what we could do is aim for a budget that's somewhere around seven.

And then I could we could also look at okay what are the other things that would be nice to have that that could float that up. And then what are are some further things that we could do without without not without pain but that would float the number down. And I think from for me developing this if I have that guidance of bring in something that's somewhere around seven and then somewhere up from that and somewhere down from that is is enough guidance for me to go forward and then we'll still have work to do in the spring when I bring forward a proposal that shows what that is and we won't necessarily be done with it then but of course not although there are districts who literally bingo bullseye Go.

I have heard there are districts that literally put the the budget on the table and they talk about it for one meeting and then they vote on it.

Could you imagine?

It'd be so cool how much time back we'd all get. Okay, so we're 11 minutes late. Um, am I reading that wrong? Am I reading you wrong?

I think that is um Yeah, I mean that seems like the the top and the bottom of what we've talked about. Um, and you know, everyone's rights are reserved. No one has to, you know, completely stick to it, but I think it gives you a direction that you can work towards. And yeah, it helps a lot.

And you know where to find us between now and then if you have clarifying questions. Yes, you're Yes, I do.

Okay. All right. So, we are just going to keep rolling. Everybody good with that?

Thank you, team. All right. Um, so, uh, so we are on item five of the agenda. So, do I have a motion for consideration and approval for the minutes from the November 5th, 2025 meeting as presented, barring any errors or omissions? Was that a motion, Kelly? Thank you.

Second, Steph, because I'm staring at you. Thank you for that. All those in favor?

Great. None opposed. Those are moved. What' you need? I think we have everybody but Chris. Okay.

Yeah. All right. Uh adjustments to the agenda? No. No adjustments.

No adjustments. All right. So, good news and recognition that up for you, Moon.

All right. So, the mics are a little quiet tonight. You might need to get closer than you usually do.

Um, so to start off, um, we had started the winter sports for the school this week. So that was really nice. And, um, I guess a week and a half ago, the something rotten play, um, happened. And I heard that was really great and from the students and, uh, family members.

Um, and also a week and a half ago, the student the free student running team uh, ran at New England's atford, Vermont, and the boys placed 25th and the girls placed 13th. So that was I think the girls have placed like the best they've ever done. So that was very exciting. And then also on the Friday, December 5th, the sparkle parade will take place. So that's gonna be really exciting. And I heard that the cross country team is going to be walking with the the little younger kids.

What are we running? No.

And then also um student leadership this week um started conducting conversations on the topic of school culture and respect. So we're kind of in the midst of that and trying to improve communication with between students, teachers and admin, but also create new channels of communication or improve existing ones. And then also student coalition um with which is like the combination of student leadership uh student council and student advisor leadership. And like we meet together like monthly to discuss um like information how each group can support each other. And um we met to talk about um kind of talk about how what each group does to those to teachers and how we could help um better kind of help teachers in addressing hate speech at her school which has been prevalent. And lastly, Miss Goko has some information that she can share.

Thank you, Moon. Is that Can you hear that? Yeah, you're close. Oh, I can't hear it from here. Hi, everybody. I'm Jen G, the principal at the high school. Thank you, Moon. Um I just wanted to I'm here tonight for um two things. One is I just wanted to add some information um in addition to what Moon said uh that we have uh it's been unfortunate that we have faced two recent incidents of hate speech um within our school community at the high school. Uh I have sent out a message to all parents, all students and staff um to say that this had happened and to talk about how we were addressing it. Um we have support from Superintendent Gray and from Assistant Superintendent as well to prioritize this as a school and talk about how we're addressing it in immediate um time right now, in the short term, and in the long term. And so today we had a full staff meeting.

Typically this is a faculty meeting and we invited um anyone and everyone from the staff to join us and talked about a number of things. And one that was uh such an incredible part of the meeting was that student representatives from those three teams that Moon just mentioned came and spoke about their work of each team and then the three teams combined to promote a culture of respect and uh and belonging uh and connection. And it was just one of those moments that you're so proud of as a staff member watching the students. you know, they've gone so far beyond talking about fundraisers and planning an event to being true leaders in our school and um that's a tough crowd, the full staff and they did an outstanding job today and we are calling the combination of those three teams the student coalition and they are now meeting regularly. Um and then the focus today for the staff was talking about what is their professional responsibility, what are the district policies and expectations and um what is good and right for kids of what we do uh to address issues of hate speech or biased incidents, what people sometimes call microaggressions.

um what to do in that moment and then also when things are reported, how to involve the um administrators and so um information was clear today about expectations and then strategies to do that. Um and so um I don't have their feedback yet. I have some anecdotal feedback that it was a a a purposeful and helpful meeting today. So I'm also losing my voice. Sorry about that. Um just wanted to share that and thanks to Moon as Moon is a member of the student leadership team who's working on this and and did some initial planning for the meeting today. Um I'm also here because I'm not able to stay for the full meeting and there's an item on the agenda that the superintendent is going to talk about which is an international exchange between our students at Freeport High School and students in France. And I just wanted to let you know uh it's not just because I'm a former world language teacher. Uh but it's something that I care deeply about and very invested in. I'm really excited about for lots of different reasons. Um I think Superintendent Gray has experience of leading these trips. We've had um some of our staff that have led trips. Students have been excited about it in the past and it is a phenomenal way to keep students interested and excited about a language and recruit students and retain students. As you know, some schools in Maine do not require a world language u for graduation. We do. We require one year.

We um encourage students a minimum of two years um with the goal of four years of a language. And you can imagine our upper language levels um tend to lose some students along the way. Sometimes that's because classes are at competing times and they have to make a choice.

Other times they've just chosen for lots of different reasons not to continue.

And we feel that experiences like this having students from France come to us and then our students go there is inspiring not just for the students who participate in it but for future students in world language classes. So, I apologize I'm not able to stay for the end of the meeting when we're talking about this topic, but um just wanted you to know that I fully support it and I'm I'm really excited. I have not yet signed up as a chaperon, but that that might be my next step. So, thanks so much. Thank you, Moon.

Thank you, Jen. Are you all set? Was that the end of yours? Great. Thank you, Moon.

All right, so we will move on to public comment.

we had anyone who wanted to share anything.

All right. Uh then we will move on to item nine, report from the superintendent. Hey again everybody.

Um well, I've said a lot tonight already, but I guess I have more to say.

Um so first u genuinely I really want to thank you because I can tell that you have already just not just for the last the conversation we just had um as a board you are very busy right now you have we have a lot going on between early childhood the budget stuff um you have been respectful you've been productive in your discussions you've kept but you've been forward thinking and I have worked with other boards that are not what I would call champions of education and this is a board of champions of education and I I feel that it's time to I want to acknowledge that because it's really true. Um so thank you for that. I do want to say a little bit more about the budget and I we've been through the finer points. Um so this is brief. Um this is where I'm I'm going to try to be a motivational speaker tonight.

Um, you know, we've been working on this, as I already said, we've been trying to develop priorities. We've noticed a strong alignment between the staff feedback and our own perspective.

It's not 100% alignment, but it it is aligned in many ways that matter.

Some of the common themes that both groups, the administrators and the staff emphasize are protecting student facing positions, maintaining class sizes that are reasonable, but also equity among the schools, um access to quality professional development, um those are priorities that are shared among all parties. And so that's a good foundation to build on. Um, this is going to make sure that whatever decisions we make are grounded in principle and that they are transparent and that keep we will keep students in mind as the touchstone for what is best. Um, I also want to take a moment to talk directly to the staff because I know that there are staff watching. This is a highstakes conversation for staff. I just want staff to know that the open dialogue that they have engaged in about the budget process is hard. It puts them in a tough position. Any staff member out there tonight um cannot could not be human but wonder about what this means.

So I want the staff to know that their hard work is appreciated. um their partnership in figuring this out as professionals is appreciated. The patience that we now have to ask for while we go through the decision-making process over the next few months is really deeply appreciated. These are all things that go into the mix and the staff are out there waiting doing their jobs while we do it and I feel a need to acknowledge that. Um and these decisions affect not only their students and their work but their lives.

So, the people who are out there being professionals every day deserve our gratitude.

Um, so the numbers, as we've just talked about, they require a hard conversation tonight. They'll require more hard conversations and those hard conversations will involve hard choices. I just would like to invite everybody, again, I'm thinking of my wife who is a social worker.

This is not bad work to do. This is good work to do.

Good work is hard. Um, these are conversations that need to happen.

Sometimes they're harder to have these conversations than others. This is a hard year. It's a hard thing, but it is not a bad thing to have these conversations and talk in this way.

So, I'd also as we think about it and we think that it's hard, this may sound somewhat cheesy, but it is also a moment of opportunity. It truly is a moment of opportunity, particularly with the onboarding of early childhood, which will happen over the next few years. The intersection of that with the budget pressures that we are now facing, I am heartened to hear, you know, we all realize we need to look beyond just one budget cycle. we need to really look at ways to find efficiency that are going to take more than one budget cycle to realize. Um so that longterm aspiration is really important and that can be invigorating because it can make it helps us become visionaries. It's daunting but it is invigorating and it makes us dream rightly so. You what is this district now but what do we want it to be 5 10 20 years from now. That's actually exciting to think about and to be a part of. Um, several of our administrators, some of whom are actually in the room, um, have been reading Bnee Brown's new book, um, which is called Strong Grounds. Um, I just started reading it, and when I say reading, I mean listening because I heavily use Audible on my commute.

Um, and it was Mr. Pitten who recommended this to me not long ago.

Yes, I'm putting you on the spot. I know that you're comfortable there. Anyway, so um so last night I was listening to this to Bnee Brown reading her own book and there was one night one one line that really struck me and it's relevant to what we're doing right now which is we're not going to build on dysfunction.

And when I heard her say this, I actually said it out loud to myself. She said it and I said that's it. There it is. And I really I really believe that's where we are right now. Because if you consider how often in an organization when you're faced with an immediate crisis, do we go for the solution that is ad hoc that's short-term that cobbles something together and what you end up with over time is peach cobbler. you end up with short-term ad hoc decisions that have been patched together that over time are dysfunctional.

And so that's because when we operate in survival mode, we're just solving one problem at a time, but in doing that, we're creating other problems. And so this moment is just a chance to do something different from that. So if we approach these challenges with openness rather than the style of leadership that Bnee Brown called armored leadership, which is just hunkering down, turtling up. Yes, Kate now knows that I listen to the book.

Um, if we lean into this with curiosity and not fear, we can make a budget. Um it's not we can view this as not a constraint but a catalyst and it will build a a stronger district.

Um it will be hard right now but we will be setting up the folks who are on this board 10 or 15 years from now like Michelle to have to have an easier job. Um I'll be retired by that time. So um that it will take thoughtful dialogue. It will mean that we have to share the responsibility. It we mean we need to own our part. All of us will have to own our part. Um we will really have to see the district as a whole rather than individual schools. It will require you board members to remember your oath that when you became board members, you don't rep represent your town anymore. You represent every child in this district.

And um it will take us collectively being willing to be vulnerable as we put ideas out there and then hash them out and talk about what our values are and see how they line up with each other and how they don't and find a consensus somehow.

So but I think that we truly do have all the ingredients we have which is smart good people right here and we can do this. So that's my speech tonight.

On the flip side of the inspirational side, do you want to talk about the staff hires?

Yes. Um, we do have a new edtech at Mass Landing School. It's Hannah Anderson.

And that is all. Is there another person?

You see another person listed on your packet, but we've just found out that that person has changed her mind and is not joining us. So, we just have the one.

Okay. All right. Thank you.

All right. Item 10 uh is our administrator reports. So, uh we are going to start with Kelly in finance.

Oh, she's already dead. Always ahead of me.

I was on deck over here. So, um, in your packet this evening are the expenditures um, from July 1 through October 31, 2025. Um, really not a lot has changed since the last time we all met. Um, we do, you do know as a board, we've talked about it this evening earlier. Um we are utilizing the special ed contingent the reserve um account that we had set up for that um for the a couple of items for students that we will be bringing forward in in next year's budget process but otherwise in that the remainder of the budget um seems to be on target and doing well. No concerns at this time questions for Kelly.

Thank you. All right. So, we will continue with our um department updates and goal review and we will start with nutrition with Erica Riley.

It's good to stand up.

Um, it's nice to see everybody again. My name is Erica Riley. I'm the director of nutrition. I figured it's worth reintroducing myself as my last name has is here. Uh, which is a good thing because we have another Erica M in our office now, too. So, it's getting a little confusing with the two em.

Um, this past year has been full of learning and progress. I've continued immersing myself in our kitchens and cafeterias, building relationships with staff and students while strengthening the systems that support our program.

I'm grateful to work uh with such a committed and talented team.

Looking at last year's goals, a reflection of school year 25. Our first goal was to reduce the amount of added sugar in school meals ahead of the 2026 USDA final rule. Um, this goal centered on staying ahead of the federal nutrition requirements. And I'm happy to share that we met these major milestones. We implemented the required um products product based sugar limits for cereals, yogurts, and flavored milk that went into effect July 1st. All of our cereals served have six grams or less of added sugar per serving. Our yogurts contain 12 grams or less of added sugar per serving. And our flavored milk is limited at 10 grams of added sugar or less per serving. With these changes alone, the amount of added sugar has dropped by an average of 13 grams per day, which equates to a decrease of 31.7% on average. Uh staff received training and support on the new regulations at the start of the school year. This helped broaden their understanding of these requirements and to help educate students as they come through the line when they see that their milk is now in an orange carton instead of a brown carton. I don't really know the marketing reasoning behind that one, but um these efforts are ongoing because by uh school year 27, USDA will require us to limit added sugars to no more than 10% of daily calories.

Our second goal was to provide meaningful professional development to support increased scratch cooking.

Um, in the past year, we made significant progress strengthening staff skills and kitchen capacity to help support our efforts to offer more scratchade meals. Several kitchen managers attended uh the statewide culinary skills for school meals training. Um, this program is a fiveday hands-on intensive training for school nutrition professionals um that focuses on the basics, food safety, um, knife skills, cooking techniques, and kitchen efficiencies and, you know, really dives into some of those scratchade options.

Um, the best way to sum up the feedback I heard from my staff who did attend was, "I'd love to go again. Can I go back next year?" Um we conducted conducted taste tests and nutrition focused activities in the cafeterias. Our friends uh actually right down the road at Replenova Farm came into a few of our schools to offer taste tests of local produce and educate students about some of the more obscure, you know, veggies that are grown right down the road from us. Uh we had a guest chef, Barton Siver, come into More Street School uh last spring where we menued a pretzel and herb crusted flounder served with Maine broccoli. And these efforts were made possible thanks to support from the fisherman feeding maners program. As a district, we pledged to uh the DOE harvest of the month initiative, which encourages us to menu a new main harvest every month.

With this pledge, we've offered things like homemade macaroni and cheese, um, featuring Winter Hill Farm cheese right in Freeport. Um, we had a rumpled thump casserole at Freeport High School, which was a big success. Um, and we also made a scratchmade roasted tomato soup using tomatoes harvested in Maine, just to name a few. Um, byre by increasing our partnerships with local farms, vendors, and distributors, it's allowed us to utilize our local food funds more efficiently. This year, Maine increased the amount of uh local food funds per district annually from 5,000 to $10,000 of worth of reimbursement. Um, essentially with this, we receive a dollar back for every $2 we spend on main harvested produce or fish or actually milk, too. Um, So far this year, we have utilized 220 pounds of Maine tomatoes, 3,100 pounds of local apples, and 180 pounds of main broccoli.

With these efforts, we're seeing average participation rates across the district um at around 40% for breakfast and 67% for lunch. This work is ongoing. Um, but our participation rates remain stable or rising at some schools, suggesting that our investment in scratch cooking continues to support student satisfaction and meal participation.

Looking ahead to next year, um, before I get into it, I I want to acknowledge the tremendous amount of work that our program has already done. Um, so to put it in perspective a little bit, since the first day of school this year, our kitchens have prepared 108,000 meals for students. Um, which I think is a number worth repeating um because I think it just really, you know, represents the daily commitment that our staff is playing and, you know, the essential role that it has in our programs. um for many families, you know, right now, particularly with SNAP benefits fluctuating, um these meals are critical for source for nutrition and stability. As we discuss new goals for the upcoming year, it's important to recognize just how much has already been accomplished and the impact it has on our students. One thing I've learned is that we can't continue moving forward with the program if we have broken systems in place. So this year's goals really focus on strengthening our systems and our infrastructure to be able to make the highest quality meals possible. And I'll be looking at things like staffing equipment and compliance standards.

So first goal for this year um is to really look at strengthening our staffing stability and efficiency. We know that consistent staffing directly impacts meal quality and student experience. This goal centers on creating predictable coverage and reducing the need for emergency director support. Um I'll admit this goal came to fruition. Um as we were in the trenches of a two weekek stretch where um I spent the majority of my time along with some others um really just trying to get the food out there if I'm being honest. It was there was a rough time there. Um, so it it allowed me to to take a bigger look at what we need to do to be able to to serve meals efficiently. Um, to give you a better idea of the barriers that we face this year, um, on average we have we have had over one and a half absences per day every day across the department.

Um, when we're constantly working understaffed, it makes it very hard to move forward with new recipes and like taste tests for students when I am being spread thin, you know, helping out in other areas. Um, and like I said, in days like that, we are literally just trying to get food out there for students. Um, so this is one of those areas that I know we need to find a better solution for. Um, so our action steps are as follows. Um, I'll be conducting a statewide, not a statewide, districtwide, uh, staffing analysis to determine where our needs lie. Working to enhance recruitment and partnerships with HR for subs and to find qualified candidates as positions come up. Um, building a cross trainining program so that staff can confidently step into other roles during some of these callout situations and working to find ways of strengthening staff recognition and team building practices. Um, we'll measure success through improved coverage, higher retention, and stronger staff satisfaction.

Second goal is to modernize kitchen equipment, which my staff will be very excited to hear. Um, really having more reliable equipment is essential, especially as we expand scratch cooking and stabilize meal production across all six schools. Over the next year, we plan to um revamp a full equipment inventory and conduct a condition assessment of all the equipment that we have in the district and build out a replacement plan to prioritize updates based on the safety, the efficiency, and the frequency of use. And I will collaborate with facilities as needed and reestablish a multi-year replacement plan. And finally, working with my vendors to have a a maintenance schedule, um a routine maintenance schedule, I should say. Um and my third and final goal for this year, um is to help strengthen our compliance with USDA standards. Um as I'm sure you've gathered, we have new regulations that kind of are changing all the time and are taking effect every year. It's a lot to keep up with sometimes. Um but over the next couple of years um we know that there will be some things that we will need to comply with and we also have an administrative review occurring in school year 27. So this goal is really to ensure that we remain proactive, prepared and fully compliant with those needs as they come up. Um so we'll be training managers and staff on those updated USDA requirements. uh reviewing and updating our standard operating procedures in all of our kitchens, conducting routine internal compliance audits both formal and informal and then maintaining a you know close communication with the state agency their best resource for these things. Um success for this will be measured by consistent compliance and positive audit outcomes both internal and from the state and improved staff confidence in these expectations.

Um, to kind of wrap things up, I am incredibly proud of what our program has accomplished in this last year from staying ahead of some of these federal nutrition guidelines and working to expand our scratch cooking and strengthening our community partnerships. Um, the goals for this year continue this momentum, focusing on long-term stability, efficiency, and compliance to keep delivering the best dining experience for our students.

questions for Erica. Thank you so much for that.

I thought that I heard or seen a report at one point um that reviewed the equipment inventory.

Is there already an equipment inventory?

My question there is a Excel sheet that has a of all of the equipment in the district and where it is and that's all that the inventory is. So there are no replacement timelines.

There are some rough timelines associated with some of the things. Um I don't know how accurate everything really is. Um for example, there's there's certain items in there that you know say that there's a 30-year lifespan on them, but we're seeing them failing now. So you know really just taking look at those things and and figuring out where we need to make some adjustments.

Colin, um, first I just want to say I uh I really appreciate the clarity of your presentation both on paper and here just fantastic. So, thank you for that. I guess I'm just curious. You you mentioned that we're um the you know uh goal three was compliance with um USDA standards. My understanding is that we are currently um working with the uh roll out of um the Biden administration um policies um that have been have been put in place. Um I just wondered whether you have any sense of anything that's coming down the pike um from the current administration that might be impacting our um funding. Um, I've I've heard something about the um the uh potential termination of local food for schools cooperative agreements and things like that. I'm just curious if you could speak a little bit to that.

Yeah, I I really wish I had more information on that. I think not just myself, but all of the directors across the state, we would love to know. Um we're honestly just kind of taking it one day at a time. The funding is there now, so we're utilizing it. Um, out of that $10,000, I've spent uh about 4,500 so far for this school year. Um, so like I said, really just trying to to utilize it while we have it. I don't know much more than that, though. Okay.

They don't really share too much about that.

No, I I wouldn't imagine they do. Just more in the in the spirit of our conversation of sort of thinking ahead and and planning. But yeah, no, thank you so much for that. And again, thank you for all the wonderful work you're doing. Kelly, I really personally just love that you've taken the initiative to implement and and put into our um kids hands these scratchbased meals. So, thank you for doing that. And I'm just wondering if you've gotten any feedback from the kids themselves.

Yes. Uh the kids do really love these things. Um, and I whenever we do make something new or different, I try and be, you know, in in the cafeterias that day while we're serving and and just asking the kids, hey, how do you how do you like this or what would you do want done differently? Um, and overall the feedback is is really good. Um, so kind of going back to my goals, I I want to be able to do these things more, but sometimes the staffing issue can make it really challenging when I just I can't clone myself. I wish I could, but to be able to be in multiple places at once when we are rolling out some of these these new things. Um, yeah.

Another one. Yeah. Um, a couple of years ago, we did a parent survey and some of the feedback was on a desire to reduce sugar in um the the food choices. So, well done. gram reduction of an average of 13 grams a day. That's excellent and something worth celebrating and communicate making sure we're communicating that out to the parents so that they know that they know about all these efforts that you're doing and the scratch.

I've noticed on the menus you have what the food of the month is or the local harvest of the month. The harvest of the month.

Yeah, that's awesome. So, I think any like that communication out there is really Can I actually ask you guys what what would be the best way to portray that?

I've created an Instagram account. I'm not great at posting on it, but is that the best method to getting it out or would you prefer to see it some other way? Because I we do really awesome stuff all the time. It's just a matter of like show showcasing it. So, I mean, I think social media is great.

Um, and school newsletters.

That's what I was thinking is I think each school does a newsletter with I don't know if it's monthly, weekly, whatever it is. you know, maybe there's just a little blurb on the nutrition piece every so often. Okay. When there's something to share, thank you. I'm curious twofold. One around the scratch cooking. Um, because I have a kid who doesn't get the menu anymore, so I don't know what they have.

Um, but you know, what percentage is there sort of a standard percentage that we're doing for scratch cooking? and is where would you like to see it?

Um I think with the harvest of the month initiative, what what is the driver there is they um encourage menuing a new item twice a month. And kind of my own goal with it is when we're menuing that um harvest of the month item, that becomes the thing that we're making, you know, scratch made.

Um and some things are speed scratch. For example, today was um Did you say speed scratch?

Yeah. Like it's um I use the term but know I'm like what exactly? I don't know. It's kind of a quick way like today we did roasted cauliflower and it was you know you just kind of toss a ton of seasonings on it, roast it up and serve it with their we had pasta and marinara sauce and all that fun stuff.

Um, so yeah, I guess what I'm going with there is I tend to make the two times a month that I offer whatever that harvest of the month is, that's kind of when I'm implementing a a scratch made option.

Um, that's not to say those are the only times. Um, but that's my my goal with it is at least twice a month having a new scratchmade recipe with it. So, okay. And um around the staffing question, um it sounds to me like because I had always kind of envisioned that the biggest um barrier to more scratch cooking was the cost. Um but it sounds like it's also the staffing.

It is the cost definitely, but also, you know, having the staff that feels confident in the abilities to do something like that. And that's where sending some of our staff to this hands-on week-long training um really helped boost their confidence and then be able to come back to their kitchens and and then, you know, teach the others how what they learned and and how they were doing it. Um so that's that's kind of what I'm hoping. We're we're able to send three every year. Um so next year I would like to send my other three managers to go.

Yeah. And then um in terms of the absences you're seeing, is that just um are those unfilled positions that you're struggling with or are those we have the folks but it's just like managing keeping everybody healthy and well and here and we have all of our positions are full.

Okay. Um and it's a matter of kind of keeping everybody here, right? Life happens, you know, stuff happens, but when you start looking at, you know, the big picture of just how often those people are out, it can make it really challenging. Thank you, Kelly.

Have we or I think in the past we've had a list of subs, kitchen subs we kept on hand.

Don't seems like we did hear that.

We have I I have a list of subs. Do I receive applications for subs all the time?

No. Um, and that's part of the reason why I want to kind of partner with um, you know, HR and and come up with some ways that we can really get it out there that, hey, come work in a kitchen while your kids are in school. You know, we'll train you. I'm not looking for somebody that's been in a kitchen their whole life by any means. You know, I'm looking for somebody that's coachable. They can come in and learn some of the skills.

But yeah, we we do have a handful of subs. One of them is over there. She's really great. Um, but we, yeah, we we have a handful, I think, you know, two or three really.

So, when there's one and a half people absent every day.

Yeah. Yeah. There's a reason they don't have a full-time job, they weren't looking to do it every day, right? Yeah.

Other questions for Erica? Thank you.

All right. So, next up is athletics with Erica.

Good evening.

Um, thank you for having me. For those who are new and or have met, u my name is Eric Hall. I'm the athletic director at Freeport High School, Freeport Middle School, and Durham Community School. Um, it's been about a year since I've been here, so I just kind of want to fill you in on some of our teams that have uh done well over the course of since last November, um, last winter. Um, our girls ice hockey, who we co-op with Yarmouth, was runner up in the divisional finals. Our boys ice hockey team who we co-opt with Brunswick was uh they were awarded the class B sportsmanship banner for 2024 2025.

Um our boys basketball team missed the playoffs by a couple places. However, they were the class A South sportsmanship banner winners. Uh our girls basketball team finished fourth in the regionals and lost in the quarterfinals. Our boys indoor track finished sixth in the states. Our girls indoor track team was Western Main Conference champs and they were the class B state runners up at the state meet last winter. Uh moving on to spring boys tennis and girls tennis. We had a uh new coaches for both programs and uh we had a huge amount of participation for those two sports which is great. Our softball team made the semifinals of the playoffs for class B South. Our boys missed it by a couple places.

Outdoor track, our boys finished in the top 10 of the states. Outdoor track for girls finished third in the states. Our boys lacrosse this uh past spring finished as divisional runners up. And our girls lacrosse team was the class B state champions for 2025.

And as we kind of look at our fall that just wrapped up a couple weeks ago, um, our football team made it into the playoffs, our varsity golf team, uh, finished second in the Western Main Conference and finished in the top six for the state.

field hockey team won the class B South regional championship and was the runner up in the class B state championship game against Belfast in a hard fought one zip game that didn't go in our favor but it was a great game our boys cross country team which Moon is a part of class B South regional champs runners up class B state runners up uh for the class B state championship. Our own Alex Gilbert was the state champion for the boys race. Um, and as Moon said, the boys competed in the New England meet and finished 25th. Our girls cross country team was the Western Main Conference champs. They were the Class B South Regional Champs and they were also the class B state champions for the 2025.

And as wounds said, um, they finished 13th at the New England's. They were the first main team to finish that high. Um, our girls soccer team, uh, made it to the regional semifinals.

Our boys soccer team made it to the quarterfinals. So, it's been a busy busy uh fall and we just started um winter season with our boys and girls basketball this week, indoor track and cheering. Uh next week we start Nordic and alpine skiing. And in December 1st, uh swimming will start and that's a change this year because swimming is now moved. So it allows them to compete at the state championship at KBY College, which I heard is a great facility in the in the New England area. So they pushed that back. So their state championship will be uh in the first week of March.

So reviewing the goals from last year for 24 25. Um the first one we talked about um continue looking at how coaches coach and how coaches communicate to student athletes. Are we communicating with purpose, appropriateness, talking the same language as well as supervision? Um, this is an ongoing goal that we have and we talk about this at our coaches meetings that we have prior to the preseason with our fall or winter, our spring. Um, how we communicate with our student athletes.

What is their legal obligations like? If they hear something, what are they supposed to do? There are some things that coaches don't always know, but my job is to make sure that they understand what their directions are, what they need to do, what the expectations are, um how they talk to student athletes, and and being consistent with their message, uh being consistent in their tone, being consistent in addressing issues as well. Um, one of the big things that's a big thing for me is the supervision piece. um because we did experience in other schools, not this school, but other school systems that had had some issues with hazing. And that's one of the things that we talk about at our coaches meeting. Um and there one thing that I talk about weekly is I send a Sunday morning uh email to my coaches for that season. Um that identifies what the week looks like when transportation, but what are some of the things that we need to be continuing to talk about? Please address these issues.

Please make sure you're having these conversations with your student athletes so that there's never a surprise.

There's never something that we've come down the pike and and we didn't know about or they didn't know about it. So, it's an ongoing conversation I feel that's very necessary and very important um with my coaches.

Um, the second goal we talked about and looked at was since I joined here in 2023, um, one of the things is we now have a full-time athletic trainer and, um, Antonio, if you haven't met him, he's very thorough in his job as a trainer.

Um he has a couple things that he uses uh to help him track with injuries called healthy roster which is a a form that he kind of uses that he can go back and forth to have conversations with the parent of that student athlete who is injured. It's a one-on-one conversation piece so that they are on the same path with you know doctor's notes uh injury um prevention uh what are some of the steps they've taken to address the injury and another thing he uses is called sway and sway is a concussion tool management tool that he uses and that's how he sets the baseline we test all of our student athletes their freshman year as well as their junior year so if anybody but he sustains a concussion. He has that baseline to to to recognize that we have a potential concussion. He cannot diagnose it. That is a doctor's note or doctor's um job to do that, but allows him to have that data. So, we've used that over the last couple years to kind of get a sense of are we providing the the opportunity for our coaches to coach um are they meeting those coaching principles? So that you know are we avoiding these catastrophe type injuries that sometimes occur such as concussions are very important at this age to try to avoid because we have student athletes who regardless of the grade level they're still growing. Um head injuries are very serious at this point where it impacts learning in the classroom. So, um, we took a look at this over the last couple years, um, to make sure that we're also meeting our equipment needs, too. Uh, for our sports that have helmets and pads, we have those reconditioned each year to make sure that they're safe. Um, one of the things is helmets have about a 10-year lifespan. So, after 10 years, they're no longer in existence. So, we end up looking at that. we have a um a data collection of that so that we know going forward what the next few years will look like in terms of replacing those helmets. Um since last year we've seen a 14% decrease in concussions. Um, we monitor the coaches that have the impact sports such as football, field hockey, lacrosse to see what they're doing. And, you know, we're seeing a lot of good coaching. So, that's very helpful. And I think having a full-time athletic trainer has kind of helped us to manage that a little bit more is he senses it.

He can direct parents to see their PCP and we can kind of start that process as well. Um, we also were looking at some ways to help uh with injuries that are more core and more leg. I mean, one of the things that at this age is a lot of female athletes susceptible susceptible to ACL tears. And so, we're looking at preventions of, you know, what are some of the things that we can do to to build that core, to build that strength muscle so that we can avoid those types of injuries. So, those are ongoing things that we're still working on and hoping to to have some more clarity in the next year. Um, the third one was to look at the coaching evaluation tool to capture the important criteria to observe and evaluate our athletic coaches in the district. And here is something what I've put together.

I kind of took what we've had previously and try to stream it down so that it's more manageable to look at with my coaches and something that's not repetitive with some of the things that was on the old evaluation tool. A lot of it was, you know, listening responsibility and things like that.

Because when I'm evaluating coach, we want to evaluate almost like the same ways that I used to evaluate teachers and kind of see that cuz coaches are teachers as as I see it. I mean, they're coaching, but they're teaching on the athletic field. So, those are those are the things that I want to capture is their responsibilities and what are they bringing? Um, what's their coaching skills? How are they communicating? Are they communicating effectively? Um, one of the things that I will talk about is in my other goals for this upcoming year is what are their goals for the program.

Meaning, what do they see outside of that they would like to see for the program? I mean, it's not about wins and losses, about how are they going to direct this program. Because as I as I tell my varsity coaches, they're like they are the CEO of the program from high school right down to our middle school and even to our youth programs and and how do they structure that and how do they see that for the future? And so those are things that we have conversation, but sometimes it's best to have them write it down to see um on it on paper. So that's that was last year's goal. So moving forward to 2526.

Um one of the things that this being the third year for me here is is to review the current and this is this is not a district policy. It's the Freeport High School athletic policy eligibility policy. Just want to make sure that I have that clear because I don't want to just to um get that one wrong. Um it's something that I've gone through the process a couple times and seen what what our uh eligibility policy is and you know it was a good chance to look at it. So, we started this August with a no, excuse me, we started this summer, beginning of summer with a u survey to kind of survey both student athletes and parents of what they feel is our a eligibility policy. Um, we kind of took that data and then we kind of looked at it and started creating a committee. Um, in August, we met in the end of October to kind of start formalizing a timeline. uh what we want to look at. What we've also done was we've also got we've received um area eligibility policies from other high schools around here, some of in our conference, some up the road in Brunswick and Mount Aerat just to kind of get a view of what we have and what are some of the things that uh other schools have. I can be honest with you and be very transparent. There's not a perfect policy. It's what fits for our school. So when we are sitting down and looking at this, that's the question I've explained it to uh the committee back in October as we will meet again in December, January, uh March and April.

Um this goal I I I don't know what it will land. I don't know if there'll be huge recommendations or changes, but I think it's a good chance to look and have that conversation about our eligibility policy at the high school for student athletes. uh what does that look like? Is it meeting our students needs? Is it not? Is there some things that we need to address? And I think that's the key in this um goal is to see if we're addressing those it addressing those needs. Um like I said, we may have a new policy, we may not. I I can't sit here on this day and say we will, but I want to be very clear and concise with that.

Second goal is to look and review our existing athletic facilities to continue providing safe playing fields that will support our athletic programs. And this includes Durm, Freeport Middle School, Freeport High School. Um I'm very fortunate to have Jason Chisum as our grounds. He knows all these fields, all these ball fields and everything, every inch of it. And and we have a lot of informal and formal conversations about this. Um, you know, I spent last summer with him. We took a day and we drove around the district looking at all the fields and stuff like that and he talked about some of the issues or some of the things that we'll we need to address.

So, one of the things that I would like to start doing is is is creating an assessment tool with him so that we can start identifying needs or identifying things that are going to need to be replaced in the future or start that conversation. I know we've started the conversation on the tennis courts. Um, the tennis courts are something that is something that we've looked at and I think there is something that, you know, has some merit behind it that it needs some upgrades. But, you know, those are things that we need to start looking at is those those fields, those courts, um the things that sometime after a while, the wear and tear of playing on them, the wear and tear of being in the Northeast, the wear and tear of the weather sometimes causes these. Um, we've been very fortunate. We have good fields. We have a great facility at the track and turf, but like anything else, they always have a lifespan. So those are things that we have to kind of start thinking about and start addressing and having those conversations for the future. And I know this is kind of on the heels of a of a budget workshop, but those are things that I I look at as well.

The last goal and and this is a goal that is not just an RSU 5 or Freeport DM. This is a a a right across the board for a lot of high schools and middle schools in the state of Maine is coaching retention. Um we probably have a hard time finding coaches. And then when I talk to a lot of my colleagues and friends who are ads, it's it's it's something that's very hard to find coaches who want to coach. The days of having a teacher/coach are not always there. Um because that's that's just not what it was. maybe 30 35 years ago when I was in school, but as we move now, that's something that we want to address. And how do we retain coaches?

How do we keep coaches, especially at the subarity level? And when I say subarcy level, I'm talking about our middle school, our JV, our first team coaches, because it it builds continuity, but it also allows our student athletes to have the same opportunities um as others would. And I really want to h look at that bird's eye view with Jody, uh, Jody Rose, and Scott Erett here. Um, and look at those things of how we can the three of us who oversee our athletic programs. How do we retain coaches? How do we make it so that um, they want to stick around? Is it is it is it doing formal or informal coaching clinics ourselves? Is it meeting with the coaches more regularly? Um, is it communicating? Is it going out and and seeking coaches? Um, you know, a lot of this is the time where I I do a lot of thinking about how we can keep these coaches. How do we develop these coaches and and how do we have the long-term success that we have here at Freeport and RSU 5 and Durm and Powell? Those are the things that I I I feel is very important. It's a goal that has has been weighing on my mind since since day one.

So, those are the the things that really I look at and try to help and and see how that affects our student athletes as well. So, those are the three goals or and review of the um goals from last year.

Questions for Eric? So, this is a streamlined version.

Yeah, I know. It's a little it's a it's a long I mean, there's some things that will be added and taken out, I'm sure, once I I I go through it, but you know, I'm I'm always mindful of that. Yeah. Kelly, uh yeah, I guess you're our trouble retaining middle school and JV coaches.

I imagine it's similar to how difficult it is to find teachers these days, but I'm curious as to whether we're having more trouble than most people are. Is this kind of like everybody's having the same kind of trouble? Um, everybody's having the same trouble.

Um, a lot of it is it comes down to um for us, we have a lot of people who are interested, but it's the time commitment. It's the commitment of I can't be there at that time. Um, and we've to to get a coach. We've actually have done some movement and practices maybe later, especially in the spring when it's not so dark. But, um, a lot of schools have this. And, you know, as I as I tell the coaches that we hire, we're very fortunate to have you, you know, cuz I don't want to be in a position where um, we don't provide that program.

So, we were very fortunate here this winter to start off that we are, you know, everything's starting to work itself out, but you know, the spring comes and and we're going to be looking for a few coaches. Um, which is which is another another stressor, but you know, we'll get through it. But, you know, these are the things that a lot of school districts are facing.

Yeah. Thanks. so much for this. I'm I'm just curious if you could talk a little bit about the um what sort of factors uh are are going to come up or come up as standard when you're looking at eligibility requirements in this way.

Are we is that sort of in the area of um uh kind of age or number of years they've attended school or is it more behavioral or is it have to do with attendance? um what rises to the surface there? Um I think a lot of it comes down to there's it comes down to to you know our grades obviously. Um are we doing the right thing by having um the two week or the week uh monitoring? Um do we look at you know attendance as well? I know my first year here it was work habits of work. does that come back into play? Um, attendance could be something that we could look at. Um, there's a lot of factors in there. Um, everybody, like I said, if you put them on a on a table and and mix them up, none of them would be the same. Um, it's just which which parts of it or which works best for us is how I see it.

Can I ask a followup? It's it's maybe a little tangential, but it got me I uh the concussion um statistics and what you were talking about there in terms of the evaluation tools you're using and all of that y got me thinking about it.

I'm just curious what is our um what is the standard protocol in for our high school or I suppose for middle school as well in terms of um if a student is injured um who is it that determines u when they are able to play again? Um, is that the is it the coach that makes that determination? Is that the student? Is that the parents? Is that you?

So, usually what happens is my athletic trainer treats the injury. um for them to get back to playing time or back to practice or allowed to resume. Um we'd like to have a doctor's note because that clears them um for them to be able to return to play whether it's for like a concussion. There's the protocols of doing that. You have steps before you actually play. Um so we have at the high school level and and the middle school level it is doctor's note. Um and sometimes parents will bristle at that but it's about safety. Um and as I as I tell parents at our parent meeting, my job is to graduate your child in the four years you're here at the high school. Um, you know, some will go on to play in college, some won't, but the most part is my job is to watch you walk across the Maril Auditorium.

And I'll just throw in my two cents about um Antonio and the full-time um trainer has been just marketkedly different to have him available at all of the home games. Then actually he traveled with the girls soccer team for playoffs because their trainer wasn't there and that turned out to be very important for concussion issues. So um you know I've seen them use this sway program where they they do the baseline and then literally they reassess them on the sidelines when they feel like they've had a hit to the head. Like you'll see them testing them on the sidelines to see if they need to sit them. Um so it's a very very immediate process which I you know as a parent I really appreciate. Um, you know, I think there is a pretty um standardized process for the back return to play protocol that that you're talking about.

Um, you know, I think it, you know, gone are the days where parents could be like, "No, they're fine. Just put them back in." Um, because parents did that.

Um, so, you know, I appreciate the the rigidity around Yep.

you know, like, "No, I I know you think they're okay, but we really want to see a note." Um and then that the note actually starts the protocol of like you know you can start yeah you practice and then you play in a week and so um I think it's um it it feels fair but safe.

Yeah, congrats on that concussion rate going down. I think that's another thing worth celebrating.

Thank you. That's all to Antonio. That Yeah. Uh you also had mentioned that you were keeping data on injuries in general. Has the injury rate changed at all?

Um it fluctuates. I think this year we saw a drop especially with our fall sports, our impact sports. Um it's too early to tell with the winter because we see different types of injuries. Uh especially there's going to be a lot more shin splints from indoor track from running on in the hallways and outside.

Um basketball tends to have a little bit more with the ankle injuries. Um so we're hoping that we will see it kind of either flatten or or dip a little bit, but fingers crossed.

And I wouldn't be surprised if in the first few years of having the full-time trainer, we might actually see it go up a little bit because we're actually recognizing things that previously weren't going that weren't necessarily getting treated. Um, so it'll be interesting to see like once you have a baseline and go from there if we see improvements or not because I wouldn't necessarily think that I mean maybe catastrophic injuries you want going down of course, but sort of minor ones maybe picking them up before they become catastrophic. Exactly. It's okay.

Yeah. in assessing the fields and the Turks and all of that I think is also really important at reducing the risks of injuries. Right.

Right. Because as I tell people, we're very fortunate to have what we have here in Freeport and Durm. Um and so I just want to keep keep it as best as I can.

And I don't know if we mentioned it in here or if we mentioned it when the facilities reported out. Um, but Jason came and spoke to the facilities committee and you know, you couldn't be more right. He just knows everything about every one of the fields we have.

Um, but this year we actually got the the turf impact tested to make sure that for concussion levels that it was still passing and it was like well above the minimum. Yep.

So they're talking about planning, you know, what's the lifespan? What do we need to be doing to, you know, to prepare for that? So those conversations are happening. Yep.

All right, we good with Eric? Thank you. Thank you.

All right.

I feel like I always say last but not least.

All right, time to get a snack.

Well, ready on as loud as Eric. I don't know.

No, that's better. Wasn't. So, um, I realized we don't do good news and recognition anymore when we host, but because I prepared it, you're going to have to have it, I'm afraid, and, um, it's a relatively short one. For those who have not been on the board for a while, historically, the hosting school would do good news and recognition, too.

So, I prepared it without reading the agenda. So, um, just briefly, uh, it's been a very positive first trimester this year. New preK and kindergarten children have all settled very quickly.

Um uh new students across the school have also become a part of the fabric of their cohorts and uh we're thrilled with the new colleagues we have here at school and new staff also do an amazing job right away. Um an area we would like to recognize and celebrate um this this visit is the great support we receive from families. Um it's been super evident really this fall. Um our PTA continues to contribute in many ways.

They funded a new prek play area out back at the cub house. Um provided food and snacks for teachers during conferences, hosted the fall book fair, and ran a great family event for Treat Street. Um they currently are planning preparing for their annual fundraiser which the craft fair on December 7th. We also had great attendance as always at four conferences um where families um attended huge numbers. We very we're always very close to 100%. and we appreciate the time that goes into adjusting work days or evening routines um to support their children's learning.

We've also had great turnout at literacy night for our kindergarten families and family math night for um families with children in grades K through three and lastly our parent volunteers who do everything from preparing bulletin boards for our character strong work to shapering uh chaperon middle school socials. Um so really make a a huge difference and uh we all feel very fortunate to work in such a supportive community. So uh a shout out to our families this time.

Then onto our goal work. Um so um I'll just talk briefly to last year's goals and then I'm going to throw something on the on the projector in a minute for this year's.

So um you you have the obviously the reflection already in front of you but this was the work we had done around really focusing on a sustainable system to provide interventions for um um social skill development and emotional support really through the work we did um making sure we had a multi-tered system of support.

bringing in this level of work to MTSS which traditionally have been more around our academic work. So we'd had MTS for reading and for math. Um, and although we had some sort of behavior supports, what they were were sort of standalone and we wanted to make sure it met the criteria of a of a more robust MTSS model, which means universal screening, which means actionable data um and then you know specific interventions that can be taught and tracked um over intervention rounds. So the work we had done um start this was year two last year was year two of uh of a two-year goal which we'd updated you previously on in terms of character strong. It is a program we use uh prek through eight in prek through five the actual program is called purposeful people and then in grades six through eight it's character strong and it's taught in our middle school grades through their advisory program. Um but in every grade level it is delivered by the teachers. uh is a part of the fabric of each and every day from morning announcements to bulletin boards to newsletters home um to families each month as the focus area changes throughout the year. So the um goals that we had put out there as a as a result of this work um the first would there be a multi-ter system support in place for social emotional learning which would support students across the grade levels of DCS as I mentioned that has been uh achieved. We spent year one identifying and researching programs that met the CASEL standards that we felt had all the criteria required for an MTSS program. Then last year was all about implementation and having a strong implementation year. Um each and every class has this on a daily basis from the first day of school through the last day of school. Teachers did an outstanding job with it. the um in starting the goal, we had to uh identify a sort of measurable target to this which we felt was going to be a little bit of a guess because we weren't quite sure what that measurable impact might be. That's where that second piece comes in. So we had um somewhat arbitrarily but hopefully with some thought thought that maybe one measure would be uh the number of individual students referred to the office for disciplinary action and um had taken a stab at like a 10% impact on that. The that statistic as I wrote in there I'm just going to read from that the statistic was interesting to reflect upon the number of individual referrals for off office office disciplinary action actually stayed pretty flat. Um it may have been wishful thinking to expect a drop off in the implementation year not only as it was new for students but also new for staff and so new habits had not yet been fully developed. What we did see though uh when reviewing end of year data was that the percentage of students flagged for lacking coping skills had harved from 22% to 11%. which is a very positive outcome uh as it can indicate that more students now have strengths for handling both the internalized or externalized challenges which is what we um sort of use for the universal screener. So in essence the screener identifies students who may have some needs in these areas. We then look to teach into those specific areas uh where those skills may be lacking. And so the measure that actually came back when we um went back through the screener was that teachers were seeing evidence in their classrooms of students having more um resiliency skills.

Then um we had talked about anecdotal evidence of students using strategies to support their own and others learning. I think I shared some of these with you previously, but um an example that um Kate had worked with um first grader needed to meet with Kate to solve a problem. Having shared what had happened, he then said, "My teacher's been working with me on my feelings. The strategy that I usually use is to breathe in, breathe out, which he then modeled u and it helps me. This time I think I've been being too frustrated." when he went down to repair the situation with his classmate.

Unprompted, he started by saying respectfully to the other child. When you do that, I get really frustrated before going on to apologize for how his frustration came out. So, equipping children with language and strategies that their classmates are all aware of too because it's universal.

Uh, another example we've talked about with the tree of choices. Actually, you'd see it when you walk out the cafeteria if you if you choose to on your right. students have approached different staff members. Um throughout last year, we would hear this. You know, they may be going to voice a concern about how a classmate or classmates may have treated them. And when prompted with this sounds like a conflict, um have you thought about using the tree of choices to solve it? Again, this is all about building agency. Everything we do, right, is about building agency for children and students to become independent problem solvers be math or social settings. And so when the adults are teaching into the skill and then prompting the child, not just giving them the answer um or saying, "Well, you know, I think that'll be okay. Move on." Or, "Yeah, yeah, we'll follow up." But actually saying, "Hm, well, what do you think you could do about that?" And um you know, some of the language that goes with that, well, how big a problem is this? And sometimes, especially for children of certain ages, the littlest thing feels just as big a problem as the biggest thing. Everything's a big problem. And they just helping them put into uh context, actually this isn't a big problem. You're right. And does your response match to how you're now thinking about the problem? Maybe not.

And equipping them with that also obviously helps them problem solve independently.

Also, um you know, how did this make you feel? what action will you take and the strategies they have they're like talk it out breathe it out move it out and invariably we shared an example previously I think where with some fourth graders a fourth grader would come across to the teacher at recess and had said they're not including me um and she said how do you think you want to deal with that he said it sounds like a conflict yeah I think I'm going to talk it out and then ran back across to the group and she said you could see them talking through and then moving on together as a group. It obviously is not a foolproof process. Um but what we were seeing anecdotally was that children were internalizing these skills and using them more independently. And I think that was what was then reflected in the data at the end of the year when we were seeing on the um on the screener that more students were equipped with strategies to use. Um so we felt uh very positive about it. We're thrilled to be um well embedded with it again this year and that language becoming more and more a part of the fabric. The piece we're excited about is that because this is prek through eight when we get to a place where students have had this for numerous years, the language that they already have will strengthen each year's experience because they're going to come in with these building skills. And the theme you know again in the purposeful people work prek through five. Um so for example this particular each month it changes not calendar month we do every four weeks.

So you know this particular one we're into right now is gratitude and prior to that was responsibility. So they each age they're working on this piece of responsibility at their level. We have skills for them at their level. So year on year they'll build that depth of repertoire of skills to sort of utilize. So that's the reflection from last year.

I don't know if you have questions about that before we move on to this year's goal.

Okay.

God, it's too bad you're so well trained now. Uh let me just get to this place.

I I am going to throw a piece up onto the uh screen now hopefully.

Um oops not that do that.

Okay. So, our goal this year is on cognitive engagement and um pretty what that stemmed from is uh recognizing as staff our school leadership team and in PC meetings concern that we've been a gradual sort of decline in students sort of pushing their learning in essence striving to do the best they can do and um so as we looked at that across different types of engagement Um it it's been a really interesting process to dig into because it's not just as simple as do your work be as much I'd love to be able to say it's that simple just do your work. Um and I think we have plenty of parents who say I tell them to do the work but they're not doing it. So I think they're seeing it at home too. But this notion the the um definition we pull from is this one up here. Cognitively engaged students are drivers in their own learning. They invest mental effort, name and work towards their own learning goals, reflect on their learning and apply self-regulation skills. It's this combination of skills and that is pulled from different uh readings we have done on different pieces of research also including work from visible learning.

And so this is what we've lent into as a school. the um I'm actually going to have to step out of this for a moment here and go to this. So um uh Kate's going to be cringing back here because she's a technology wiz. So when it came to this goal, one of the pieces that was pretty hard because it's not like, oh, let's just go and pick up the previously used goal on cognitive engagement that seems to be floating around on the internet. It is much more sort of nuanced than that.

So what we really had to come up with and think about was how do we make this sort of measurable when we think about what will be impact. And so what we have done by we I really mean Kate Harrison our assistant principal here who took the lead on this with Kate Parkin and our school leadership team is really to look at the components of this really come down to when we look on the left hand column habits of work and the engagement and determination are kind of where we currently report out on this sort of work.

When we look at the indicators when we think about when we've done research into cognitive engagement the factors that contribute to that active listening participation responsibility reflection and goals and next steps.

So goal setting and targeting you know where you want to get to as a learner on even very shortterm pieces is a critical part for example. So, we created a progression that captures all 10 grade levels of our school and um asked teachers to reflect upon their class relative to where they might be on this continuum. Now, one of the things I'd say to you that we had to keep sort of leaning back on that is in situations like this, it's not about the tool, it's about the data you pull from the tool. So the tool will be an imperfect model.

We're not going to we could spend years developing a model to try and measure this, but we're not research scientists. We're running a school simultaneously.

And so teachers understand that coming into this work and go into this very much from that perspective of let's make sure that we are looking at this um through the correct lens.

So then to start with we had done PD with our staff around what is cognitive engagement, what are examples of cognitive engagement um that K created a tool here. This is just a a screenshot of a first grade one for example. Each teacher um had this tool for their class and then um completed that sort of reflection of where they think right now their students are. This is a similar kind of tool to what we use for um character strong but theirs was obviously specifically from character strong.

So stu teachers just can get into this work use a pull down menu that gives them the choices of what options exist and then it kind of creates this broad brush one at the end. The reason we have done it this way is that we can look at a if you look across vertic um if you look across horizontally you'll be able to see a student that may have great strength or areas of need. When you look down a column you'll be able to see like huh we can see where this is more of a general need or you know where this is more of a general strength. That also is going to help us as a school because I would say to you that when we first did this, the thing that really stuck out was that active listening using the language that we created on that progression is a massive area of need and across the school and um um and to be perfectly honest with you apparently in administration too because I was used as the example at our staff meeting and apparently I'm around a kindergarten level when it comes to active listening which feels like a long long way to go. Not sure I'm going to make it. Um so this is the tool we are using to kind of track uh starting point ending point and driving some of the PD.

Then um most recently because we've been working on this you know it was our launch back work and then looking at this we had um PD time to work on this just last week and um sharing cognitive engagement strategies. So if we look across again in our school because there's 10 grades, we try to work on some of these goals that are across the school that kind of contribute to the fabric of the school. And so sharing practices also is a big part of that so that they can be a learning from each other, b people are seeing like okay so this is what's going on these earlier grades or this is what they're working towards in the upper grades. Um it was framed that each team as they were working through this they shared celebration things that are going well so far a surprise that's come up to them in this work um opportunities for refinement and next steps. I'm not going to go take you through all of them, but a couple of examples here. You'll see just from preKK, you know, celebrations at this point in the year. Um that um in preK, the math tool used at parent conferences to celebrate learning and determine their goals. Uh starting to see students notice and celebrate their growth with their peers. um in kindergarten, you know, lessons on determination under habits of work, spending lessons on goal setting in writing, taking time for reflection, um making time for sharing after each lesson. Um start of use with some tracking tools with managing production of work. Um and part a big piece of this I have to say although I framed it early on with it's not just about do your job there is too a big onus on us to provide real clarity for our students as to like this is what finished work looks and sounds like this is what you are aiming to achieve and whilst we feel like we've done that in the past that is a piece that we're sort of like doubling down on to make sure there's clarity and you can see some of the tools there for the younger children about self-reflection reflecting on, you know, have they met their goal? Are they doing their work at sort of one star, twostar levels? So, students using habits of work, increasing stamina, students are feeling proud, accomplished with their work, building reading stamina and writing stamina and volume. And then just to jump right up to seventh and eighth grade, a big focus of that work is very much around habits of work. Um, as we try to, you know, sort of prepare them with those skills for transition to high school. So students are self-reflecting every two weeks in each class about their habits at work. Um they're becoming more accurate and aligned with teacher scores and feedback. Um the habits of work are more visible and integrated into the classroom. So there's really specific examples of what this is what determination is going to look like in today's lesson. This is what this will look like as we're doing this um lab work today in the science lab. this is what engagement is going to look and sound like so that students have that understanding even though we think they must have this right but where we're seeing such a big gap in it like we have to teach back into what those expectations and clarity are so in math already we're seeing more students attempting level four extension activities um when student choice and authenticity has been increased and in humanities in LA um feedback loops and conferring within projects um is providing structure to incite reflection and past to move forward with on their work. So that's the goal for cognitive engagement. Um those are some of the um aspects of the work so far. Um our second goal, um I'm going to have Kate talk about because she very much leads that work even though she very much leads this work too. Um do you have to maybe not Okay.

I can't freeze it. Do you have your Hello. Um, our second goal is on attendance. Um, and our goal is to increase students sense of belonging in school that will impact both wellbeing, overall well-being and our attendance rates. So, as a result of this work, um, we're hoping in a 10% reduction in our chronic absenteeism from 9.6% to 8.64%.

Um, and just to put that into some context, right now in this school year, we're currently at 4.7%.

Um, so we're off to a very strong start with our attendance. Um we have an attendance team that meets regularly to collaborate on student plans and to track absences. Um and we do look for patterns and trends um whether it's in a grade level or in certain student populations. Um something we've noticed for chronic absenteeism is it's primarily students that face um complicated health concerns. Um, so those are ones that even the best attendance plan isn't going to change their chronic illness. Um, but we are continually chipping away at it. Um, for example, last year we had a couple kids on um, attendance intervention plans and one of those students went from last year being um, present for 79% of his school year to this year having 100% attendance rate. Um, so that's super exciting and we are recognizing students who have improved their attendance. Um, we're doing things like sending positive postcards home. Um, using reach my teach to send some messages about attendance.

Um, and I was able to attend the state conference um on attendance u that was run by Count Me In um to get some more strategies and work with other assistant principles in our district.

So, um I think we're going to have a positive trend in our attendance this year. Um I think that's it.

I feel like you might be sandbagging your goal. I'm just saying. Any questions?

Questions for Will and Kate. I literally had to do that in my head.

like that wasn't the show, right? It was Will and Grace. Sorry.

Yeah. I'm I'm just kind of curious about your first goal. Um you you said you noticed a decrease in the last few years around cognitive engagement, and I'm curious if you obviously you said you're not social scientist, so you may not have the actual factors that are leading to this, but I'm wondering if you've reflected on it at all. Is it an artifact of COVID? Um, are there other things that that are contributing to this that may be addressed outside of the classroom?

Cell phones. Look for cell phones, for example.

Well, I think I have to go lean on I'm not a social scientist. Um, although I may be playing one on TV right now. It's there's I think it's I always uh so I think it's helpful to look at factors that can contribute to it. Um, but I think there's so many that it'd be hard to nail onto one. So I think for example, uh, broadly over the last 20 years, the involvement in travel sports of whole families compared to what kids participated in sports as a student athlete has generally trained uh, changed pretty significantly. And so we have a lot of students involved in pretty sophisticated uh programs whether it be dance or sports or different activities that take up significant amounts of time outside of school that have also sort of like become priorities and I don't know whether co's a factor in it. I think if you read the literature, there's certainly some would indicate it has been um that a big part of national attendance uh declines was really triggered by COVID and where all of a sudden school was deemed as optional. Um and therefore there's, you know, there's knock-on effects from that. So I think for us there's probably factors. I'm not sure there's things that we're leaning on that um like oh if we could address this or that simultaneously. I think what we're saying is this is what we've seen what can we control and what can we do to try and impact that and I do think we're also trying to be uh much more specific with feedback to families in terms of ways in which they can also support it. Um we had gathered some feedback last year at family math night um at literacy and at PTA in the spring as we were starting to move towards this and one of the questions was about homework for example and you know what makes it tricky to support your child with homework and I would say a significant number of the answers were like my child just doesn't want to do it um and that their parents were not giving up on it they were looking for ways themselves to engage engage their child in their learning. So, it's feedback to us that is like a um just like attendance as Kate said, making school a welcoming place to be, making lessons engaging um and making the learning relevant and making sure it's clear what learning will look and sound like. Just that clarity of expectation and and then reinforcing it with feedback as uh you know both feedback of like this is going great as a strategy to keep using or feedback that there's growth here and this is a great strategy to use to get closer to that outcome but not one thing I'm afraid.

I I had a question. Um, I thought the tool was great and I imagine it can generate some really good data to use to inform next steps. I'm curious about the um the lift on the teachers to, you know, how how often do they have to like reassess all five of those things and, you know, use the No. So we that won't be a um that's not it's not like a report card thing or a necessarily a progress monitor piece. Um two or three.

Yeah. So we're only going to do that as two points like a start point end point to see that growth.

Um but where we do where we do lean in on it was like what does it show us now?

What we do continue through the year is more of the things that you just saw a moment ago in terms of so another factor we did which I I failed to mention that but I think is is important is that within our professional evaluation professional growth model as a district all educators are required to um work on a goal specific goal and uh or two they can choose two goals and um so what we had said to um all our staff this year was one goal has to be on cognitive engagement and um and if you want to choose a second one you may but otherwise that's going to be the focus and they they vary and they also some of them do team goals. So for example a grade level team may be like we really are going to be focused on lifting cognitive engagement in writing and this is what this is going to look like as as a success and these are strategies we're going to try.

The reason we had done that for Kate and I is that when we have 60 different goals um giving people feedback and participating in the process of supporting them with reaching their goals is really difficult.

Whereas now when we do mini observations and we check in with staff part of that conversation is how's the cognitive engagement goal going because it's so applied to everything. So um and then the other piece of that is within our sort of team PC meetings more often not there's conversations about what strategies you're using for that for that goal or what strategy you're using around cognitive engagement. So the focus is across not necessarily from that that initial data but then our hope is that the growth for all our collectively is through our staff meeting time our PD time our PC time and goal feedback. So that's kind of how we've tried to build in that that process of checkpoints. Great. Thank you.

Other questions? Thank you. Thank you.

All right. So, uh we are up to item 11 on the agenda, which is board comments and committee reports.

Um, so we'll we'll start with sort of the open-ended um opportunity for anyone with information requests or information they want to share.

Throw it back out there for Oh, Valerie.

I have two very brief updates uh regarding region 10. Great. Um, one is that I asked when we would potentially hear back about the need for the voting for the items that they want to upgrade and they said last time they heard in late January. So, there won't be any updates until probably late January on that piece. Um, which is something I neglected to ask last time.

Um, the other thing, uh, I attended last Friday one of the two celebratory breakfasts for our shared students for student of the quarter. It was wonderful. Met several of our Freeport representatives at region 10. It was a really great experience and obviously I think we all applaud all of those students and their recognition.

And I recall the celebratory breakfast is prepared by the culinary, right? It's always good.

Fantastic. Thank you.

Other requests, comments.

We did put um an update on the early childhood education task force here. We just want to keep a little placeholder for that. Um we have a couple of folks, I think there's four of us, right, that are um that are on that task force.

We've met twice. Um uh and it includes the principles from all of the schools that uh currently offer prek services. So Mor Street, Panel, and Durham. Uh we have um community members. I think we have we do have someone from each of the uh either town council or select board from the three towns, which is great. We have local uh child care providers. Um and um you know we just wanted to provide a quick update to the board about where that work um has led us so far. sort of the first meeting was really um around understanding what the mandate was like what was what was what did we have to do and when um and just get more details around you know what were we dealing with here um the last meeting that we had which was la last week that was last week right I don't know time flies um uh we really talked about you know the the district and all the districts I guess in the state have the options of when they want to start providing these services. Um so you could start some people started this year. Um you have the opportunity to start next year um in cohort three which would be four year olds. Um you could start uh in which case if you started next year with four-year-olds the following year you would have to pick up the three-year-olds. So, just a reminder, this is for um four and five year olds, excuse me, three and four year olds that are currently covered by CDS services, so special education services um for the kids before they before they hit the school district. Um so, uh so we could pick up the four-year-olds next year and the three-year-olds the following year.

And then uh once it's required for everybody to have everybody the the year of uh July 1, 2028, we would already be already doing those things. Um we have the option of going into the following year's cohort, cohort 4, which is when we would pick up the three and four year olds, and then we would be compliant the required year the following year, or we could not do anything and just start in 2028. Um, obviously the benefits to starting sooner is there are um there are funds right now available to help facilitate that that transition. Um, you know, the thing that was really clear to me and and please jump in the other folks that were there is, you know, we're already providing a lot of these services to the four-year-olds through our prek program, right? So, the meeting we had kind of showed how many how many kids what's the what's the uh population of kids this encompasses as four-year-olds, which ones are we already servicing and what would it take to to reach the level of requirement um to move into cohort three. Um I think the the general consensus of the board or of that committee, although I actually think it was unanimous, was that it made a lot of sense to move into that cohort three option. Um, we're already doing a we want to take advantage of as much of the funds that are available because those are kind of first come first serve. Um, and once they're gone, they're gone. Um, and continue moving the work because I think one thing we heard kind of loud and clear is this move from CDS to the school districts, while, you know, state mandates are never fun, is actually probably the best things for kids. Um, we're better prepared and better equipped. um to serve these kids um because the kids in CDS just don't there's just not enough staffing. So um so I think the the committee was interested in moving forward with what does uh cohort 3 look like? So similar to the budget conversation we just had, you know, with that parameter, what could that look like for us next year?

Um and I I believe that that is kind of where we sit right now and then we'll meet again in December. That's our next meeting. Yeah.

December 18th. And we'll hear more about what that could look like, what staffing might need to be, you know, updated in order to meet the, you know, we're we're doing a lot of it now, but not all of it. So, what does it look like to to meet the needs um and be compliant with cohort 3? So, anything else I missed?

You covered the basis.

Any I'm looking at you guys to see uh um other folks that were at the at the meeting.

I think one optimistic note is the potential that we may be getting reimbursement for things that we've been providing on our own.

Yeah, true. Very true.

Um yeah, that was kind of the update on that. Um any other requests? I think we're good. Uh all right. So we will move to an update from facilities and operations.

The facilities and operations committee met on Wednesday, November 5th. And during that meeting, our director Glenn Reynolds, director of facilities, reminded the committee that we will be uh we're scheduled for a facilities tour on December 12th starting at 9:00 am.

So, if you are available, they're always highly informative. This year, the theme of the tour is going to be um reviewing the energy audit phase one projects that the board has approved. So, we'll get to see um where our money that we approved is making improvements and energy savings in our buildings.

One highlight of that tour that you definitely won't want to miss is that we will be making a stop in Palo to admire the new Leechfield and playground. So, please don't miss it.

Um um Glenn also talked a little bit about the capital improvement plan for 26 27 and 2728 and one particular point he mentioned was that the roof replacement projects for the high school. So the high school roof is was scheduled to be replaced in phases or over a couple of years different parts of it. the two different parts that were going to be replaced are now going to be lumped together and done at the same time in order to um experience some cost savings by getting a little bit better pricing. So that will be um done this next year, but the the replacements that were scheduled for this year will be paid for out of capital reserve funds.

questions for Kelly.

I feel like uh we might switch you to hype up the uh come to our budget meeting calls that I do because yours that that was way more fun than my the ones I interrupt everyone's dinner with every year. All right. Uh Colin.

Yeah. Yeah, I just wondered if we could take a moment maybe we could all close our eyes and and um you could describe to us like what the leechfield looks like just so we can kind of like like imagine it now so that then when we see it we can't do that. You have to come and experience it in person. That's the only way.

Thank you. We manifested.

Thank you for entertaining the possibility. All right. Um, so, uh, finance, uh, you were the only one who's here that was there. So, you want to do that one? Okay. Um, okay.

So we finance committee met on the 22nd of October and at that time our director Kelly Wentworth went over the progress with the FY25 financial audit. Sounds like everything's going smoothly. Um we're on target and there were no concerns expressed.

Um, Superintendent Gray also updated the committee on the budget process. A lot of what he said there has since been repeated to the entire board, but um, he explains the listening sessions that have been conducted in the schools with the staff as well as the administrators and um, as well as the staff survey that was conducted.

We then had a conversation about um health insurance benefits and whether or not the we should think about switching from the current health insurance plan to investigate whether it would make sense for us to look at any other plans. So, uh, Kelly outlined how many people are participating, um, what kinds of premiums are being collected, and, um, the district's contribution to the current plan.

In short, in FY25, the district spent about $4.5 million on health premiums and cash and the staff paid about 1.16 million. And um Kelly talked a little bit about how she reached out to other um administ other districts to see if they were also still using Anthem as their health insurance provider to see how many of them might be looking at other options. And it sounds like um of all of the districts that responded um all of them were using the MEAB the MEABT Anthem plan. the one that we use right now. Um, so the committee members present thought that it might be helpful if we had a better understanding of how MEABT chooses its health insurance provider so that we would know whether um it would be worth our while to look further to see if there are other plans that make sense for us to pursue. So, at that point, Kelly um stated that she would reach out to see if they would send someone to a future finance meeting to discuss the process.

Coming up on December 10th, there will be a joint meeting with the facilities committee to review the continuation of the vehicle equipment replacement plan and talk a little bit more about what's coming up in phase two of the energy audit.

Thank you. Questions for Kelly? Either Kelly. Both the Kelly's.

All right. Thank you.

All right. And we will move on to our policy update.

Uh hello. Um, we met on Thursday, November 6th, uh, at 4:15 p.m. Eastern Standard Time because Eastern Daylight Time ended the previous Sunday. Uh, so we thought we should meet at the proper time. Uh, we went through a number of policies. A few of them we're bringing before you uh, this evening, including uh, EBCF, automated external defi defibrillators, um, which is response to a law change.

I'll go into the details of that um when we get to that actual review. Um we also uh looked at um EBD uh temperature standards for schools which is a new um policy uh that is driven by law. I have a note here in um in my notes uh that just says meat thermometers.

Uh I think we discussed I remember yeah whether we needed to get more meat thermometers to measure things but we the my understanding is we don't uh but basically um I think the outcome of that is that um our superintendent is going to um run uh our cousins uh Cape Elizabeth's um uh policy by Glenn um and see uh whether he thinks that's good or whether we need more meat thermometers um and then we'll get back to us. Um we also uh embarked on a a very uninteresting policy JICJ uh cell phones and other personal electronic devices in schools which very few people have any interest in or opinions about. Uh so we started that conversation. Um uh we've got more work to do I think is the uh is the real takeaway there. But um it was nice to to start to dig in there and thank you to the board um for providing the direction for how we're um meant to go there. Uh we then also had a brief chinwag about um GICK bullying and GICK R bullying administrative procedure which is part of our regular review process um and we're going to be doing a little bit more work with that uh before we bring it to you. And we adjourned at 6:45 in time for dinner.

I know we're going to get moving on to the next ones here. Um, anybody have any questions for the minutes before we jump into the policies before us?

Wasn't that bad, Moon Moon? It wasn't that bad, man. I tried really hard to make it good. It's taking off. Okay, you bored him out of here. Well done, Colin.

Great.

All right. You want to jump into the policies before us? You want me to get a motion on the table for him? Yes, please.

All right, let's do that. All right. Uh All right. So, 12A. Do I have a motion for consideration and approval for the first read of the following policy EBF, which is the automated external defibrillators, AEDs? Cara, Steph, thank you.

Uh so we bring before you for first read um EBCF um which is uh about automated external defibrillators and this flows from um a law change to um main department of education rule 41.

Um and this change will uh be bringing us into compliance um with that. And I believe that Superintendent Gray has a few additional notes to kind of clarify um where we are on that.

It does indeed it does indeed bring us into compliance.

Um and Erica, you may have to help me out with this because you've actually done more work on this policy than I have. Um it means we have it uh defibrillator in every school. Um we are working with the nurses on um a protocol around m maintenance of those and regular testing of those and training of both staff but also in the case of the high school students who could be able to use them.

And that training is happening in PE classes. Did I miss anything important? You got it. Yeah. Okay.

Curious how many schools they're currently in?

They're in all of the school buildings including Laugh and Learn. Oh, so we do already have them.

And um we're looking to extend the installations into outdoor spaces that are used recreationally. Uh those require hard wiring um and uh sort of containers that are weatherproof. So that requires a bigger investment. So those will be phased in overtime starting with the highest use areas. Our athletic trainers travel with AEDs as well.

Okay. Did we find the one at the high school? Was that a last year problem? Maybe. Yeah.

Somebody had like gifted us one before we even had one and then we couldn't find it. Huh. When they did the renovation, not sure.

I think we maybe we found it. Yeah.

On um does this mean that we don't currently as a general rule have them at sporting events? We do with our athletic with our school sanctioned events with that have trainers present. Yes.

So what does that mean for middle school? Because we don't have trainers at the middle school events.

I'm not sure about the consistency of the AED, but there's one in every building. Okay.

I just thought that language was kind of weird. At least one in every building. I mean, who decides if there's two or three? Is that Tom your job to to decide that?

I think we would like consult with our nurses.

Because I thought I was involved I think in that one of those early meetings talking about that and I had thought, you know, there was some concern that having one at the high school by the nurses station um because I know where they are because I look um they they are that's a difficult get to from across even though it's not a big school, right? So, I thought the idea was to maybe have them kind of strategically placed.

I hadn't heard that conversation, but I was we had that conversation with the nurses. Okay.

Yeah. I mean, I think this is where uh I guess we probably this is somewhere between or soundly between policy and then procedure. Um which is that um I mean as as uh I believe it was you Cara pointed out that um the uh American Red Cross American Heart Association um recommendation um is uh much higher right to have have have many more um than the than is required by state law. Um and um I think this policy does not reflect any statement as to you know we're not saying in this policy currently um that we should follow uh American Heart Association um uh rules. we could do that um at a level of policy, but I think I think in the in the context of the conversation based on what um Superintendent Gray said in terms of consulting the nurses on this um that on the implementation side uh that was sort of a separate matter I I suppose from from the policy but again that to be to be clear if the if it was the board's uh pleasure we could say something in here to say we would like to ing ourselves uh into compliance with what it was recommended by the American Heart Association, that would be many more. There would be cost associated with that. Um but again, that probably would drift into where um uh as Superintendent Gray has often reminded uh the the policy committee to um to recognize how to keep the policies as simple as possible. So it gives the school as much flexibility as it can to execute that based on the professional expertise of those involved. But I'm not sure if that answers your question, Daniel.

No, it does. I I just had remembered the nurses saying that. So, I want them to be comfortable. You know, again, obviously, someone can run and get it.

They can start CPR if that's what's necessary. Um, I do like the idea of training students. I think that's huge.

Um, I would advocate that advocate that I think middle schoolers could do it as well. I mean, the AED is so simple to use. Um, that that's something we could start even then. noted.

Yeah, I mean I appreciate that this is saying we have one at least at least one at every school. It looks like previously it was like we may buy one for maybe we'll buy one and maybe for use in one of our schools.

Hopefully you're the lucky one at the school that has it. Um I do think it's a little unclear that it's a the way it's written. Um, I'm I'm supportive of having one at least one at every school, but the RSU5 school department should have at least one AED at each school and may acquire one or more for use in its schools at the Shouldn't it just be should have at least one AED at each school for use? Like I I'm just I'm just a little confused where it says should have at least one and may acquire one.

Yeah. Yeah. I mean, if you care how things are written, you know, there's this guy on the policy committee who's like driven it into my brain that the words apparently matter and Yeah. I mean, again, yes, I think I I will I will own that this was uh uh this was not one that we um Word Smith.

Yeah, we didn't we didn't we didn't you know Yeah. So, poet it up to the degree that perhaps we have done others, but it hasn't beened.

Yeah. It doesn't have a which is fine. I mean, but but I think but I think it's good to it's good for the the board to and I mean and you as the chairperson to sort of to note sort of like you know is this is this level of language something that we do we do we like that do we like the do we like the kind of boilerplate language of that um or are we after a little bit more concision and um saying what we actually mean uh as a district.

It's just a good open question for us to have.

Yeah. I guess my one question is is should strong enough for us, right?

Or or should it be must will have at least Yeah.

for use in the school and that athletic Yeah.

I mean, my imagine my my understanding is the should is is from the state. Um we can change it to I mean I don't think we're going to be I mean what do we think?

We can find them. I mean, it's we found them. Okay, we found them. We know where everyone is. Yes, Danielle does.

It's an it's an unfunded mandate essentially. So, I think that might be where that language is coming from, right? Uh is my guess, meaning it's handed to us as an unfunded mandate. So, if uh districts that don't have the funds to do it. So, yeah. So, it's I suppose we're doing it.

I don't know. Should we be bold? Should we just say like will Should we do it, guys? Yeah, let's do it. Let's let's change it to Will.

Which I think then an homage to Will. Um, so I guess as far as then middle school activities, maybe that's something the coaches, right, maybe we could work maybe Eric make sure that the coaches, right, know where they are at the school.

Are the schools always open? during middle school sports. Yeah. Yeah.

Just I'm I'm I'm just, you know, yeah, it would be nice, right, if there was a way in. I mean, I think most coaches have had keys or somehow to get an I too, but I'm I don't know. Otherwise, you know, you're going to have the coach carried around with them. I mean, I suppose I suppose maybe just a a pointed maybe request coming off of what Danielle is saying if it would be appropriate to say I mean, we've talked before about um uh board approved policies, board approve approved procedures and then what the procedures are that are not board approved but are available for anybody to take a look at if they want to. Um I mean I think perhaps uh maybe even for second read um if it would be appropriate to have um between superintendent's office and Eric's uh office to sort of say like all right well what actually is the procedure what is what is what is it that we are currently doing um and just to let us know that so that again we then know that and I suppose then can say um sounds good keep keep doing it or like we have some red flags actually we're going um uh policy the be Jesus out of this and um make things much more strict.

We do love to policy the be Jesus out of things technical. Yeah, if I could I know you didn't ask me.

I heard somebody is you I know you didn't ask me a question, but uh in addition to the actual unit cost and the installation outdoor cost, um nurses, our nurses are calibrating these once a month, checking the supplies. Um so every place that there is an AED, um we also have a nurse in every building.

That is not the case across Maine. Um we're very fortunate, but we do. So there is there are costs of of acquiring the equipment, maintaining the equipment, potentially replacing the equipment and a lot of the pads that go in with the equipment expire. They expire with some frequency like once a year. So like there are some other costs associated with this and time.

Do you have a sense of are we talking a thousand bucks? Are we talking 10,000 bucks? 50 bucks?

Um probably like a thousand for replacement to replace the whole unit.

Oh the unit. Yeah, about I think they're about a thousand. They're about uh well depends. I've tried to buy one online. Um they're about two grand.

Um like just to have at your house.

Yes. I wanted to donate it and I was trying to figure out how. Okay.

Yeah. The outdoor ones are estimated between three and five. Okay.

And our Narcan is associated with that unit.

Oh, so they're all in the same They're attached. Okay.

Is is is that an issue if we have students trained that they would have access to the NAR? Do they have access to the NARCAN? Now, this is probably not part of this policy, but it it's attached to the AED. My understanding it's a separate policy, I believe, but I believe under um rule 41 um students are trained in um in the use of the the Narcan, both the AED and the Narcan. the AED and the Narcan is my understanding, but that's just from a very cursory look at it because it's not relevant to this particular policy.

Val, did you have a question? I admit this may be too in the weeds. Um, there's no such thing at this one.

Are we stocking pediatric paddles in the younger schools as well as the regular battles?

Yeah, and we have everything in the kits. Good question. Okay. So, um Okay, if we change that to will, how do people feel if we change it to will, but we leave otherwise the slightly awkward sentence that um Michelle was calling attention to?

Uh I mean, if you're going to change it, you might as well delete a couple more words, right? To make it smooth. Yeah.

Will have at least one AED in each school. one ED in each school to I get rid of the I'm glad we're being get rid of the and may acquire one or more ads. Get rid of that. Get rid of the may acquire one or more.

Could Could you repeat that because Colin was kind of like teasing me? You can watch the film. Okay.

No, I mean I think Yeah, I I have trust that you guys can make that sound.

You'll make it sound better than I could. What do you actually wanted to say?

We're trying to I wanted to say that we'll have we swear to God we're trying to get more efficient and just like and like really kind of but this is not just take out that whole phrase period after school, right?

Take one require one or more AEDs.

So, but then you have school school. Do we have one at the central office?

Yes. So maybe it's we'll have at least one AED in each of our buildings for use in schools and school athletic events.

Does that cover the Laugh and Learn out building?

Laugh and Learn has an AD in its facility.

We will we will play with this. Okay. I I get those are very smart.

Yeah, you guys are much better at words than me. So, did you ask about free port works? No, I said we So, if we use change it to building, we do meet that standard.

I I might question what is the definition of building? I wouldn't say that because then you're talking like the sheds and like the containers of the you know like occupied buildings like yeah because I was thinking of laugh and learn being actually the I am hearing Jenny's voice in my head in a different conversation but say I just hear Jenny's voice in my head but um don't we all she has said that um in a different context the central office counts as one of the schools so I'll check on that. But there's a way the principal I guess I guess by default. Um that one's the superintendent. That's who you're talking to.

Um okay. So what what I understand is the directive from the board is for us to go back and to that sentence a little bit in our next meeting to make it just real good.

You will have one at every school. Yeah.

Also at the athletic events because they might not be on site. Okay. Okay. Yeah. Well, that's an interesting one, right?

Because what if like does that mean you have to bring one to other schools?

No, I don't think so. We don't generally bring our trainer to other schools.

No, we're relying on on the other trainer the host school will have an AED in dairy because as it as this it's a state law. Okay.

But maybe they're in the should area. Who knows?

Well, that's right. Because as it's written now it's required.

Yeah. at at school athletic events. It doesn't say where, but it only says you should have one. Doesn't say you will.

If we change it, it will require. My understanding is the consistency across MPA school sanctioned sports is that the host school does have an AED.

Okay.

Does that just for the record in our meeting um is this how your meetings go?

Yeah. Uh, no. In our meeting, I was like I was like, "Hey, like let's just like really kind of go with the like simplest language possible." And Cara was like, "Hey, you don't know our board. Like they're going to want to get in there and just like me, you know, mess around and get their fingies in into all the, you know, into all the sentences." And I was like, "Cara, you don't you don't you're not you you really need to give them the benefit of the doubt. You know, we all know what's happening here.

Just just what I what I've kind of written down here is if I go to that sentence, the RSU5 number five school department will have at least one AED at each school and at school athletic events.

Okay, that sounds good to me. Let's just make sure that's actually like deliverable.

So that is middle school as well then. I think so. But if our middle all of our middle school events are at the we don't have any offsite, right? They're all at the two schools. So the question is is are they accessible?

I I I wouldn't guarantee that the door that they're closest to is unlocked or you know I think that there are some complexities there that the committee should grapple with.

Maybe that's a procedural piece.

Okay. So again, I'm I guess I will just I will be policy committee chairperson and say that this is again a moment where I think we need to we really need to understand whether or not we really want to be directing the school professionals to like be to do to do their jobs um or whether uh we want to really micromanage what they are doing uh because I think that this this is where again if uh I don't like we don't seem to know all the currently all the details of where all of these things are and what what events they are at, but I'm not sure how relevant that is to the policy. Um, so I'm just I will play devil's advocate on that to say I'm not sure how relevant that is to the policy and do we want to be um uh making those stipulations or are we saying the policy is more or less fine and also Tom at the next meeting could you come and just tell us what we currently do so that then we know.

So you're saying you want to keep should and not will. No, no, it's not.

No, but like we're talking about like athletic events and middle school events and can you get access to it and like the policy doesn't address any of that and I don't think the policy should address any any of that. That's a question of I believe that's a question of procedure if I understand uh what Superintendent Gray has been training me in understanding. So that's fine. I'm just asking if this if the change from should to will is your problem.

No, I'm I'm fine with that. That sounds great. actually and you can still lead the rest to procedure.

As I'm reading this again, I I I feel like we will be okay because it says for use. It doesn't say they have to be at the athletic events. It says they're we have them in each school for use at these things. Am I understanding that correctly?

I'd say yes. I I think the question I'm I have is do do you am I hearing that you want one at the athletic events whether we have them there or not? And if you do that's perfectly valid to have in policy and we'll have to we'll work on it. We'll get we'll get it done somehow. Well, my concern is as someone who has coached tennis, I know when I'm out there on the court or at another school on their court, like I know we don't have access to one of these things, but I don't want to put an undue burden on anybody to make sure that they carry one with them at every tennis or whatever event.

And what's access, right? Is access within hands is access within five minutes of running in the building. Like I I guess I'd rather leave it the way it is and then our procedurally we can say like in this school he's back to this is starting to feel like the painted turtle conversation or whatever that thing was.

Remember the turtle conversation we had like I was telling Valerie about that the other day. That was such a cool conversation.

Yeah. I mean it started with like service dogs and we ended up going down reptiles for like three hours here one night.

So from a school perspective, I would say please be really careful about how big you open this up because it starts I remember when we first got the AED and it was first donated like whatever 14 years ago and has been updated since then. And um but in a lot of situations, the first thing someone's going to do is call 911. And if we're not careful, we're going to be saying, well, do we take one when we do field work? And then we're asking teachers to take more I mean, we already take medical kits, but generally it's if you can't do it with the medical kit, if there's a concern, call 911 and get a professional in there. And if we start to say you got to run to room B or C or whatever space this is, it may be better just to call 911. So I just would just caution how far we go because I think sometimes the more we open it up to like, well, if you said this, this, and this, it infers we should also have said that or covered that. I think it's you've got it pretty good. Well, we'll have one in each school facility or school department facility. And then if we want to go, it's a floor, not a ceiling. We can go beyond that should we want to, but the policy is set. Yeah, that's my two cents worth.

That's what I'm trying to get to. Like that's all I'm saying is we will have one in each building.

Yes, absolutely. And I think also just from what we from again when uh I think as I hope hopefully said if I didn't say it was in my notes um that this was run by the nurses and they said yes. So again, we're not in general, we're not going to bring we will not bring this to you if if right and if we do then shadowed us mostly at Cara, but you can also shout me a little bit.

So just to confirm, it's not in the law to have it at school events.

No, just no. And we are looking though to install it at our major play services surfaces at each building over the course of a year or so. Kelly will be looking for savings to do the installations over time at all buildings.

Okay. So, we have a motion, we have a second. We have a lot of conversation.

Uh people comfortable with a vote on first read for this one. And just a quick for Karen's sake um how our policies work is there a two- read process. So first read um we will take a motion and vote and it'll go back to the policy committee to um juzj in this case. Sometimes there's no changes necessary. Sometimes it's small issues.

Sometimes it's more material. Um and then it will come back a month later for a second read. And once it's voted on the second time then it becomes policy of the district.

All right. Any other questions, comments? All those in favor? Great.

One down. All right. Do I have a motion for consideration and approval for second read of the following policies and procedures? IHEA programs for multilingual learners, JKA, use of physical restraint and seclusion, and JK A uh procedures for physical restraint and seclusion.

Valerie, thank you. Malik for a second.

Um, we bring these before you for second read.

Well, that was straight and to the point cuz they're because they're what we showed you before.

Okay. So, no they're the real real good. See, I just leave space and he'll fill it. Um, okay.

I, uh, I wasn't at this meeting, so I wasn't sure if there was material changes from first read to second read. These are essentially the same. Great.

Um, so this is the case where there was no real changes, Karen. And now it comes back for a second read. And we have a motion and we have a second. And I'm not seeing any questions or comments. So, we'll move it to a vote.

But we could also just kind of get in there and start messing around with a little bit, you know, just like, is that what you're looking for? I mean, you want to look at the time. All right.

All those in favor? Wonderful. None opposed.

All right. Uh we have no unfinished business. It always makes me laugh when we say that. I feel like all we have is unfinished business. Um but we'll move on to new business. And I believe this is going to you Tom.

It is. So I am thrilled, tickled, delighted to be able to bring this opportunity to you which I hope that you feel you can support. So, as was mentioned earlier in the meeting, at an earlier point in my career, I um took the lead on developing an international program at one of my previous schools. Um it started out with me just being a teacher who'd like took spring break trips with kids.

It actually started with me being a kid who had a teacher who did this for me and it changed my life. And um so it became a passion for me. Um as a European history teacher, I got to go all kinds of cool places. I could choose any country almost and have a cool um historical cultural event with kids. Um it expanded when in 2008 I w I became aware of a program through the Gerta Institute which is a joint venture by the US Department of State and the German Foreign Ministry to um have intercultural exchanges between Germany and the US. And through that program, I developed an exchange relationship with a school in Germany that it well it continues in that school and to this day. But the model that we used was so successful that we started to develop similar exchange partnerships with schools in other countries. So what I've brought before you tonight is an exchange partner school that I have worked with several times in the past in Sigra France. Um I know anybody here been to France.

Okay. So if you are familiar at all with France is in northwestern France. Um, if you were to fly into Paris and get on a train and and go west for a few hours, you'll end up in the area of Cray. Um, it's a small town about the size of Freeport. Um, it's located in rolling countryside full of horse pastures and farms. Um, the nearest city of notable size is an which is oh about 150,000 people. Um, bigger than Portland, smaller than Boston.

just a really delightful medium-sized French city. Um, Sigre lies within the province of Maine in France or Maine. And believe it or not, there is a direct formal educational relationship between the state of Maine and the province of Maine in France that is aimed at cultural exchange and awareness etc. So we have an opportunity to partner with Lis Bles Pascal in that city to have an ongoing relationship framed around several different kinds of exchange. One is what we're proposing is the most immediate and that is group visits, exchange of group visits. And in this model, we would take a group of I say the ideal size is about 20 could be between 15 and 25 kids um probably in grade who've had French two, three or four somewhere in there. Um travel with them to France.

Each of them would get a host family and a host partner. Um each school vets its host families through volunteer the same volunteer process that we use background check all the adults in the home etc. Um the families get to know each other before the actual exchange happens online. So you have kids talking parents talking with each other getting to know each other. Then they travel with um a number of teachers who are the chaperones.

um they would go for April break plus an additional adjoining week of school. So they would miss a week of school. Um but what they get in return is this c authentic cultural immersion. Um in the past when I have done this particular trip and you'll see included in the slide deck there is a sample itinerary that is actually an itinerary I have run in the past. Um the exchange itself was 11 days and that left a bit of time to take just our group and have a few days in Paris on our own to explore the city which seems really worthwhile to do since you're already there. That would be optional.

That could be added or not. Um it's an additional cost but um one of the benefits of doing this is that compar it's relatively low cost. It's not free certainly, but the only thing you're paying for is the travel expenses, the chaperone expenses. You're not paying for hotels. You're not paying for meals.

Those are born by the host families. Um where and then the thing is we have to reciprocate. So next fall, sometime around late September is pretty much ideal. It's when the French kids have a school break. they would come here and we would give them a similar experience.

The experience involves mostly um going to school with your partner and shadowing them throughout a school day.

Um that can get a little boring when the classes are in French, but the host schools also provide enrichment things for their guests. So when we have gone to France, typically every day the host school does a little something. It might be like a special um pull the kids out and have them go and work on a public service announcement in the video production room like in English or work together on a project with their French peers about what does each country do better than the other. Um it's something I've seen happen. um they will arrange field trips for us three or four times throughout the experience. Um we get on a bus or get on the train and go somewhere that's of a local interest. And I've provided some examples of what those have been in the past. We would do the exact same thing when they come here. Um and I I can honestly say that it changes kids lives and the relationships that are formed last an entire lifetime. Um, not everybody gets a best friend out of it. Sometimes you get somebody sometimes you're matched with somebody that's not a great match for you and you learn from that, too. Um, anyway, I've probably talked enough. I hope you get the picture. We do not necessarily need uh according to our pol there's a copy of our policy around overnight trips just for your reference.

um it does not require board approval but I feel that in this case it's best for the board to be aware of this. We are looking into the insurance um lens of it. Again, I have done this in the past extensively with in another school district, but I have talked to our insurance agency who is putting together um specific liability and travel policies for us that the kids would have to buy into. It's not very expensive altogether. It's like between $1500 and $200 per participant that would cover them.

Yeah. And we do have other trips. So I think Freeport Middle goes to Quebec. I mean, it's not as extensive as this, but it's international travel. I know Dana Bisby here at Durham has done trips to Spain with the middle schoolers precoid. Um, so what did your kid go?

Yeah, Garrett was supposed to go the year that hit. Yeah. Um, so, um, so I mean obviously there's there's ways around that. Yeah.

Yeah. There's solutions for that.

The cost breakdown I've given you is obviously an estimate. I do regret to say when I wrote that up, I estimated that flights would be $1,000. I just looked the other day and to go to Paris from Boston this April, the cheapest flight I found was 1,500 something. Um, it just, you know, it it is what it is. Depends on when you when you book them.

I think it depends on when you book them.

I just looked at April break for Spain and maybe Paris is more expensive than Madrid, but that was significantly cheaper than that. So Oh, good.

Yeah.

So, as someone who actually did a program exactly like this in high school, it is pretty like life-changing.

um you know, not knowing a lot of a lot of international kids growing up in in Connecticut, it was it was pretty impressive to you know, I went and stayed with her family, she came and stayed with my family.

Um it is it is a great opportunity. Um I wonder how in your previous districts the cost piece because you know we want to make it accessible to as many people as we can like how have how have other districts tackled that? So, I have a bit of a vision here. Um, the vision couldn't all h it would take time. It couldn't all happen with this particular exchange. In my other district, um, first of all, all trips like this required some level of fundraising. And usually the target was to raise enough for one person to go. Um, and it would be shared among the group. So, I mean, that kind of shaves a little bit off. A longer term vision was that my previous school was an F1 visa issuing school.

I'm not sure if folks here know what that is, but it enabled the school to recruit um international students who would pay tuition to come and earn credit and get a diploma. There are lots of schools in Maine, including some very close to us, that do this. But what I really liked, and some of them, if I'm honest, have done this in a way that has been really just about the money um and figuring that money into their regular budget to try to count on it for it to pay for essential things.

Now, that's creative right there. That's not very wise. But in this case, the the district took all of the tuition money received from foreign exchange students, set it aside into a scholarship fund, and then every one of our students who went who was um economically disadvantaged usually ended up getting substantial financial support. Um it wasn't 100% but it was often close. So it reduced that barrier by a lot. And when I left, we were in the process of putting together a booster just as we would for the soccer team or whatever to to continue to enhance that fund.

Excuse me. So, there are ways that we could build infrastructure around this.

Um, and there are other partners if if this is an idea that fits well. There are other partners that we could could work with in other countries and it could be a defining aspect of what we offer for kids. And I'll make one last pitch like um just as I was as I as I was getting close to the zenith this of this program um if we okay so let's just if one of these exchanges cost let's say it cost $3500 per kid to go. What if we decided, if we're being really visionary, that every child got an experience like that at some point in high school? Okay, so that's $3,500 per child, but it's spread over four years.

That's what per year, less than $1,000 per year. And if you compare that to other things that we consider to be of value and spend money on like the athletic program, we we spend far more on other kinds of enrichments that are great for kids. So I think that if we wanted to just start with trying the concept, there's plenty of opportunity over time to grow in ways to build in mechanisms to make this completely equitable.

questions. Valerie.

So, I'm sort of unclear on the ask. Are we being asked to approve the relationship or approve the expenditure?

I don't think there's any expenditure on the boards. I mean, other than No, because it's the insurance cost would even carry to the This would be totally self-pay. Yeah.

Okay. Thank you. That's what I That's what I thought and then I was a little cloudy for a little bit and so I figured I would just ask the ask is to approve the relationship.

I think he just wants to hear my French accent for the motion because he said we don't even have to vote on this.

Wait, this do it.

All right. So, um we'll get a motion on the floor and then if you have additional questions. So consideration a motion for in consideration and approval for the exchange relationship between Freeport High School. I got that one and Lisa Blae Pascal in Sre France. Not too bad.

France France. Uh Danielle, thank you. And Steph, other questions or comments?

Um you also refer to an 8 to 10 week exchange.

That is a possibility. We have we're not there yet. But um so Lis Bles Pascal has um they have a program of a number of their classes are taught in English especially in their the the tech school is actually attached and a lot of the tech classes are taught in English and if we wanted to we can have one or two of our kids every year go there for 8 to 10 weeks. basically a quarter and we would then it's direct family to family.

So we would host one of their kids, they would host one of ours. I did this in Mount View. You have to build you have to figure some things out like so our kid is going to go there for a quarter.

How are they going to keep up with their classes here? Um you know we just figured that out. They did it remotely and they they is remote education the best? No. But it's if it's to afford an opportunity like that, it it was worth it. Um so if we wanted to take that step, that's available to us.

Yeah, I just think it's a super exciting opportunity and particularly uh I love the the visioning for how to um make it more accessible to uh more students and uh yeah, I think it's fantastic. So, let's do it. And um there's a McDonald's in that town there.

So um yeah, you should Google it. It's like it's a lovely little town and I just I've been there several time like I feel like I can vouch for it. It's a safe place. It's a really good community. It's good people.

Sounds like you already have one chaperon in Jen. So I don't know who runs the school when she's doing it, but sounds like a great idea. I guess Charlie could do it.

All right. Any other comments or questions? We have a motion and a second on the floor. All those in favor?

All right. Wonderful. Uh so the last piece that we have is organizational business item 15. Um and basically what this is for is to fill the um open spots from committees from Mora's departure um from the board last month. Um so the current o openings uh current vacancies on committees are facilities, strategic communication, curriculum and program development and then professional negotiations. I'll put a caveat about professional negotiations. We've talked a lot about negotiations tonight in the budget process. That is the support staff negotiations. So professional negotiations are not this year. Um, so you know if you ever want to be on a negotiation that's a good one because it's not meeting generally doesn't meet in its off year.

So um so some of them um so strategic communications, professional negotiations and curriculum and development we have kind of teed those up to be two to three board members on them. So, we don't necessarily have to fill every one of those, but if we have folks that are interested in them, um, we would love to love to add those. Uh, I believe in your packages is all of the typical information of the what's, you know, what each one entails, when do they meet? Hopefully, folks have had an opportunity. Yeah.

And the curriculum um committee, we actually month meet we meet monthly. Okay. With Erica taking over.

Oh, right. Because this now says once per trimester. So that I think that was previous, right? Yeah. So now it's monthly. Is there a specific time or is it just No, we're we well we just kind of picked times our very first meeting. A lot of the days are the same day that we actually have uh board meetings.

Yeah. So we met this morning. Oh, okay. Yeah.

All right. Um and then we also have who's on what committee if you don't remember what you're on already.

So, I will I will look to Karen first because you don't currently have any committees. Please don't feel like you need to pick up everything Mora was on because that's a lot. Um, but if anything jumps out at you of interest or or the other committees, sometimes we can get people to, you know, trade.

Um, well, the curriculum and program development interests me for sure. Okay.

Um, and then if you want to put me on another one, it's fine with me. I will learn as I go. Um, I don't know how many you need to be on.

There's no minimum like expectations.

Um, you know, certainly not in your first year because it's a lot to get up to speed, right?

Um, but you know, they're uh I think facilities is a good one. Um, and it meets right before Kelly's she's she's in sales mode tonight clearly. Um, um, so that one meets uh right before a board meeting. Well, it alternates the board meeting. Um, one is finance before the board meeting and one is facilities.

So, it's kind of convenient. Yeah. Um, what? So, it meets once a month. Yep.

So, um, so if that's one you're interested in, that's a good one. And strategic communications is one that's a little bit in flux. Yeah. Steph, I would like to be on the strategic communications committee. Okay. It's available and no one else wants it. Very interested.

Okay. So, I'm seeing stuff for uh strategic communications. I'm seeing I'm writing the wrong words. Oh my goodness.

I wrote curriculum next to the curriculum committee instead of Karen. It's getting late. Well, um Okay. So, all right. So, we'll put um Karen for facilities and curriculum. We'll put Steph for strategic communications. And then anybody want to I don't think we even need the third person for negotiations if unless somebody's feeling like they want their name down.

Okay, we'll leave that one alone. All right. So then, do I have a motion for consideration and approval to make appointments to the following committees? Uh Karen Brer for facilities and operations. Uh Steph Worth for strategic communications and Karen Burr for curriculum and program development.

Colin, thank you for the motion. Valerie for the second. All those in favor.

Wonderful. None opposed.

Public comment. We even drove Will away so his building. He still left.

Um all right. Well, then I would take a motion to adjurnn, which I think Anna's ready to make. All right. So, Anna and Valerie, all those in favor. Wonderful.

Thank you guys. Have a wonderful holiday next week. Thank you.

to do.

============================================================

RSU5 BOARD OF DIRECTORS MEETING TRANSCRIPT
Meeting Date: December 10, 2025
Source File: transcript_2025-12-10_w-9C0GWxN08.txt
District: Regional School Unit 5 (Freeport, Durham, Pownal, Maine)
============================================================

Good evening. Welcome to the RSU5 board of directors meeting. There goes my name tag. It's a good start to the meeting. Uh it is Wednesday, December 10th, 2025.

We are here at the Freeport High School Library. Uh we have a full board with the exception of Danielle. She is out of town this evening. Uh we will get started with the pledge of allegiance.

Do I have a motion for consideration and approval of the minutes from the November 19th, 2025 meeting as presented, barring any errors or omissions?

Thank you, Valerie. Steph sees me just staring at her over there. All right, all those in favor?

Great. None opposed. Uh adjustments to the agenda.

Yes, I do have sorry I do have a few. Um we have an additional retirement under 8C which I will announce at that time. Number two is that under 8D the student leadership team presentation will be deferred to another time at the request of the students who were going to make it. And third, I need to ask for um an additional executive session at the very end of the meeting to discuss a personnel matter.

Okay. All right. We will get started uh with good news and recognition and we'll start with Maria with the student rep.

Thank you all for coming. So this is our good news and recognition. We held a panel last week for seniors with representatives from college and universities which shared information information and advice how to support mental health in college primarily during your freshman year. We had reps from USM Bowden UI oro SMCC UNE and St.

Joseph's. This is also tied to our goal of supporting mental health for students. And I think some of you know that I went to Morris High School in BMS yesterday to anonymously interview students about the honor pouch policy as that has been mentioned a few times. So I would like to start off by thanking the Morse High School and Bath Middle School principles for letting me come and speak to students yesterday.

Morse and BMF and BMS had had Yoner pouches for about two years now and have been praised with their good results by our board. After speaking with staff members, students, and administrators, it is clear that this change has had a reduction of phones in the classroom.

The opinion from the two schools was obvious. The culture of phones has changed. However, from what I observed in regards to the yonder pouch, it was unclear that the pouch was the reason for the change.

When watching students enter the building, I saw that the majority of the students did not put their phone in the yonder pouch and walked past the table.

A small group of students had put their phone in the pouch or they dropped it in the main office as that assorted by grade and as an alternative option. When watching the exit, the majority of the students exited without a pouch to unlock.

Some comments from the students about yonder were that even though phones weren't being used in class, many students stated that walking the hallway had increased, as well as students using their phone in the bathrooms.

When speaking with many different high schoolers and four middle school classrooms, the majority of the students told me that they did not use the yonder pouch and never have. When discussing yonder pouches with the principal from BMS, he shared how he was aware of many students did not put their phone in the pouch, but the objective of the policy had been met, no phones in the classroom.

The results clearly come from the enforcement of the policy and the repercussions for not following it and not entirely from the pouch. During conversations with the principal, I learned that Morse and the two middle schools had money to fund yonder, which is from the federal ESSer funds that were provided to main schools in response to the pandemic, which was a total of $40,000, and 4,000 annually to purchase pouches for an upcoming sixth graders and the replacement costs. This is very different from our school as we would be using budget money to pay for Yonder.

And we should all be very aware that this is a big purchase and should be thought through very carefully. As this would come from our budget, we need to be mindful. Even though phones are way, it doesn't mean that yonder is being used. We need to ask ourselves, are we paying for a pouch or a policy? I yet again hope that this me sharing the results will help you gain insight about how this affects our students and how well the pouch is actually working. I hope that this provides more thought and will help gauge a decision that will help benefit our school and its students. I also would like to thank the principles at Morris and BMS again for letting me anonymously interview their students. Thank you.

All right. Uh I did not know you were doing that. So, thank you for doing that. That is um that is great insight and I'm sure we will get back to that when we're talking about the policy. So, thank you for that. Uh all right. So, we will move on to public comment. uh given by given given the number of folks that are in the seats that are usually empty, we'll give you a quick overview on how our public comment works here this evening. Uh if you'd like to speak, um Erica, have do we have a list? Are folks Okay, great. Uh so, uh Assistant Superintendent Mateo has a list. If you have not put your name on that list, feel free to do so now. Uh I will go through that list, call you up. You'll come up to the microphone. Uh you'll tell us your name, you'll tell us what town you live in, and we ask you to keep your comments to three minutes. Uh we do have a timer going. We'll let you finish your thought. We won't cut off your mic when you get to the end of the three minutes, but just try to be cognizant of that. Um and uh yeah, so we have it looks like we have six we have six folks that would like to speak. So uh we can certainly get through uh accommodating those. And um did everyone who wanted to speak get their name on here? I want to make sure everyone has an opportunity. Yes. Okay, great. Uh all right, we will start with Emily.

Good evening everyone. My name is Emily Kelch and I'm a student at Freeport High School and the vice president of the sophomore class. I'm here today to speak against the proposed use of yonder pouches and the bell-to-bell phone ban in school. I want to start by saying I understand why the ban proposal came up.

Phones can be distracting, but after listening to board conversations, talking with teachers, and hearing student perspectives, I truly believe this proposal creates more problems than it solves.

Freeport High School already has clear restrictions during instructional time. And for the most part, they work.

Teachers set expectations, phones stay put, and learning happens. The first step before moving to a bell-to-bell ban should be ensuring that these existing expectations are enforced consistently across all classrooms. The issue isn't a lack of rules. It's a need for consistency in education.

What we need is education and self-regulation and responsible use.

Real life skills that actually prepare us for adulthood. The purpose of high school is to set us up for the world beyond it, not to protect us from learning how to manage technology or uh or distractions in realistic situations.

Removing phones removes that learning process. Students shouldn't have to rely on a locked pouch to make decisions for them. We need guidance, not restrictions that treat us as if we aren't capable of learning these skills.

There are also real safety concerns. In emergency, time matters. Any delay in communication can make a crucial difference. Whether it's a medical situation, a threat, or an emergency such as the kind we practice for during Alice, students deserve immediate access to help. Students should never have to make the choice between policy and safety. We also need to think carefully about our priorities. Our district has se several uh ongoing challenges that could benefit from more support. For example, vaping in the bathrooms continues to be an issue for many students and it raises understandable health concerns. We also have students coping with depression, anxiety, and substance use, and the services that support them are often stretched. One of our most urgent needs is staff.

Reductions and unfilled positions already hurt students um learning. For example, in seventh grade, I was in an advanced English class. In eighth grade, that teaching position was removed and it was never filled. This left us unprepared and made it harder for us to succeed in high school honors classes.

These gaps impact student academic success far more than phones ever could.

So, when we talk about spending tens of thousands of dollars on the potential use of yonder pouches, we have to ask, is this where already limited resources should go? Is a piece of fabric more important than mental health support and substance use education? More important than student safety where a locked phone could delay help? When you choose to yonder, you choose not to fund something more urgent. Penalizing every student because some struggle with phone use doesn't feel like support. It feels like control. If the goal is to help man help students manage distractions and anxiety, then the solution should be to teach them healthy habits. Even if the attention isn't punishment, the reality is overbearing and signals a lack of trust rather than genuine support.

Phones can be distracting, but locking them will never be the solution. It removes responsibility instead of teaching it, creates safety risks, and takes money away from the issues that genuinely impact student lives. We deserve solutions that help us grow, keep us safe, and move forward, not backwards.

Thank you for listening and for considering the actual perspective of students who live these decisions every day.

I also have a um copy of the speech if you are interested.

Thank you, Emily Hazel.

Superintendent Gray, Madam Chair, Madame Vice Chair, administrators, members of the board, and others gathered at this meeting. My name is Hazel Glette, a Freeport High School sophomore, member of the student leadership committee. I'm here today to speak about the bell-to-bell technology band and the possibil possibility of implementing yonder pouches for RC5. As a high performing student who uses her device only during the approved times and puts it away when instructed, I have seen no issue with the current school rules. I make sure to follow the instructions and in turn I'm able to check in with my parents and stay updated on anything I may need to address during the designated times cell phones are allowed. I also have the reassurance that in an emergency, if I need to reach someone or if I need to tell a family member I love them for the last time, I still have access to my phone rather than having it locked away for the entire day in a pouch that can only be opened at certain checkpoints. At the end of the 2024 2025 FHS school year, student leadership sent out an administration approved anonymous survey to the student body asking how it felt about the current school cell phone rules and giving them a chance to reflect on the future of phone use as the board prepared to make its decision.

This information was presented to the board and to my knowledge board members were given the opportunity to reference this document during their decision-making process. I am here today to speak on behalf of the 205 students who shared this their thoughts on this decision you will be making in compiling the statistics and personal responses from students of Freeport High. One thing is clear, students feel as if losing access to their phones puts them at risk and is and the proposed policy is unnecessarily restrictive and punitive. I am now going to share anonymous quotes verbatim from the very students this decision will impact. And I implore you to listen. I fullheartedly believe that phones are not as big a deal as this whole plan is making them out to be. Rarely are phones used in class and when they aren't in the holder, kids respect the rules and keep them in their bags. You cannot put our phones into yonder pouches for the day because people need access to their phones to communicate. Yonder pouches are a safety issue. There are countless scenarios where a student might have an emergency and need their phone with the pouches and we cannot do that. For example, like an Alice emergency.

Students being unable to contact family members or friends during school seems unnecess unnecessary and unfair, especially for the majority of students who follow the rules and use phones only during the appropriate times. I believe phone pouches that are unable to be open freely are unfair and a safety hazard to everybody. Students need to learn how to get off their phones in high school.

Taking them away is not teaching them that. And once they get out of high school, they will not have learned self-restraint. In real life, we able to use our phones as tools. By not having our phones in school, we're taking our curriculum backwards instead towards the future where it needs to be headed. It's disappointing that these are the rules the administrations are spending time on. There are many other issues of of higher importance. The fact that we are in high school should be a good enough reason to not have something that could risk our ability to contact 911 or our parents in an emergency when other options are not available. These pouches are not only a danger, but also a waste of money. They do not belong in Freeport High School as we have far too many other issues to take care of. These are just a few of the voices from students who chose to speak up and share their thoughts on a decision that will be impacting their years of high school. I understand this is a tough decision to make and I want to thank you for hearing me and the voices of Freeport High School students. I'm happy to provide more information or help referencing the form previously shared. Thank you.

Thank you, Hazel.

Linda Unfortunately, my speech is five minutes and if I don't finish it, I'll would just wait to the end and finish the last two minutes. This this has nothing to do with Bell. Hello, my name is Linda Farwell and I'm a resident of Durham, Maine and soon to be retired life skills edtech at Mor Street School. I'm retiring at 59. I worked at a different school district for 23 years as a title one edtech and have been here at RSU5 for a year and a half. Staying until I'm 62 doesn't make much difference in my retirement check and the job conditions make it not worth staying. I am here because I feel like the school board needs to know how hard the life skills edte work as salary negotiations are to be determined this year. I am concerned that the edte at more street school in the life skills program are small minority and will not get much consideration during negotiations. The life skills children who come to more street school usually don't have any formal education. We teach them routines and what is expected of them at school.

This is not an easy task. Our job is even high risk for injury. In my year and a half here, I have been I have endured being kicked and pushed daily.

Other co-workers have been bitten, their hair pulled, and even concussion has occurred. School is foreign to these little learners. When they successfully get to the other schools in RSU in RSU, RSU, sorry. We are the ones that acclimated them to the routine of learning. I am amazed how far our children come in a year and we did that.

My hours are 8:20 to 3:20. I have five minutes to set up a student schedule before the children get to school at the end of the day. I have five minutes to enter data. I get one 15-minute break and a 30 minute break. There's no downtime, no time to be late when a break is over. When I say no time, I mean we can't look away from our students for an instant or talk with our co-workers. Some of the life skills edte rarely get to leave the room. The fact is there should be at least one more edte than there are students in this room, which currently is six students.

But right now, you can't even retain more than four. As I've said before, there are great people in this room. But they will leave. Do you blame them? The edte in this room can only work so long under these conditions. I have had two other teachers tell me edte in the life skills program have a high turnover.

That's just the way it is. Imagine training employees year after year. This job isn't easy. And my one and a half years here, I rate my experience and competency level a five out of a scale of 1 to 10. The school board values our students education as much as you talk about it. Then show these edte how much you value them. I've listened to the school board meetings for the past year and a half. I've heard mention of three job openings that have not been filled in the life skills room. The school board has never raised any concerns on why we can't get anybody to work specifically in the life skills program at Moore Street School. A couple of months ago, a school board member wanted to know how many job openings there were at RSU5. Mr. Gray got back to her, but no mention to why there were three job openings at Moore Street School and the Life Skills program. I gave a fourmonth notice, and I'm pretty sure there is no one to replace me. Currently, there is a long-term sub that leaves one and a half hours early daily in our room. And there was an edtech that can only work three days a week. She has been here the longest, two and a half years. On a rare occasion, we get a sub in our room or receive any help from someone else in our school. Thank goodness for some dedicated edte and very special life skills teacher that must put her job on hold to be an edtech for the day. I am asking the superintendent and the negotiating schoolboard members to approve $2 or more an hour if you work at more street schools life skills program. This is not uncommon uncommon practice as the life skills employees in the Cumberland and Falmouth school district receives $2 more an hour. Show these edte that you acknowledge their hard work and dedication. More money an hour probably won't be negotiated as stated previously because we are a small percentage other than the raise the edte will receive. If not a raise, maybe when multiple positions have not been filled for two years, you offer the program more money for their edte for so many years, a sign on bonus, a recruitment bonus, something. Last year, the superintendent said at a school board meeting, "We haven't hired two edte, so we're going to hire a teacher at the high school to do that job. Maybe if you paid us more, then you would get qualified edte." I am sure you know how much an edte makes with no experience.

But if you don't, I will enlighten you.

An edtech 2 one or two gets $21.40 an hour. A full-time sub makes $23 an hour.

An edtech 3 gets $2269.

What are you doing to find edte in this room? Are you going to create a task force to recruit and retain? Many people don't even know what an edtech is. Can't apply if you don't know what it is. Have you ever tried filling out an application through the apply track? It is complicated. I needed help when I decided to relocate. Perhaps a parent would like to work three hours and share the job with another parent. Has anyone reached out to the colleges as there are December graduates? How are you getting the word out? And how are you sharing this with the edte in this room? My closing remarks. Edtech contract negotiations are happening this year.

Some schoolboard members and the superintendent are involved. Please be mindful of the edte in the life skills room. If you care about the children, as as you mentioned, you will do right by them. Thank you. Thank you, Linda.

Korea. Craya, please correct my pronunciation. Uh, Korea. Okay, great.

Um, hi, my name is Korea Galway and I am a sophomore here at FHS. Hello members of the board. Over the last couple of weeks, since the original email came out about the yonder pouches and the administration of the new phone policy, I have been listening. I have been listening to my friends, my classmates, to my teammates, to the seniors who have stopped on their way out the door. And the consensus is clear. People are not a fan of this policy. Of course, I understand that it is not about whether we like the policy or not, but really about limit eliminating the distraction of phones. But since then, I have been observing the different methods that each teacher has used to battle the phones being put away and have come up with the realization that our phones are not as big a problem as this new policy is making them out to be. But of course, it isn't up to me. That is why over the course of the last couple weeks, I have created a petition against administering this new phone policy and have been gathering signatures. And from the over 200 signatures I have been able to collect, I can tell that this isn't just my opinion. That's why I am asking you, the members of the board, to just take a minute to hear what we, the students who are actually going to have to submit to this policy, have to say. Students want to keep the current phone policy the same as it is now, where only repeated offenders face all day phone confiscation and no yonder pouches. It seems as though our schools keep keeps providing consequences to the whole school for problems only happening with a minority of the student body. Phone distractions in class are not being are not as big a problem as you might think.

These next four years in our life mark a huge time in our learning as students as well as future adults. We need this time to prepare us for a world where phone bands are not put in place for us and we have to administer our own self- responsibility. Thank you for your time.

And I also have the petition of the signatures as well as a copy of Thank you, Melissa.

First was just want to thank you for all that you do on behalf of us in our community. Um my name is Melissa Luchi.

I'm a science teacher here at Freeport High School, a community member, and a parent of two FHS students. I'm here tonight regarding the proposed bell-to-bell ban on cell phones, Apple watches, and AirPods. While I recognize that the vote on this new policy may be largely predetermined, I feel obligated to share my concerns. At FHS, our current policy requiring cell phones to be placed in holders during class has significantly improved teaching and learning. There is, however, a meaningful difference between restricting phones during instructional time and an all day ban enforced by yonderbacks.

Um, a total ban prevents several problems in my opinion. The first and most glaring problem are is the budget implications in a year when the district may eliminate 17 teaching positions.

Purchasing yonder bags is hard to justify. Even if funded through alternative sources, those dollars would be better spent on instructional supplies, building needs, and most importantly, staffing.

Um, as a science teacher, this is number two. I, uh, regularly use phones to support learning, mapping field sites, identifying species out in the field, collecting data using photos and videos, documenting spectra, creating time-lapse recordings of investigations. A bell-to-bell ban would undermine these practices and diminish student learning opportunities.

Number three is AirPods and accessibility. Student usees of AirPods for self-paced lessons, video-based stations, and as part of an IEP or 504 accommodation, including noise reduction support. Even general education students use music to focus or manage anxiety.

Um, prohibiting AirPods will increase requests from formal accommodations and create enforcement challenges.

um classroom sets of wired earbuds raise hygiene problems and uh replacement issues and policing Apple watches just seems like incredibly difficult. As a member of the school's district strategic planning committee, I can say with confidence that our work does not envision a school community shaped by heavy-handed approaches. Instead, we imagine a district where students are joyful, meaningfully, and intell intellectually engaged and authentic learning and support in an environment that fosters their autonomy, growth, and sense of belonging. In that context and with significant budget cuts ahead, purchasing yonder bags for bell-to-bell ban feels misaligned with our values. Uh so as a teacher, parent and community member, I rem I believe restricting students from using air um phones, AirPods and watches during all non-instructional time is excessive.

Given the looming loss of positions across the district, I respectfully ask you to to not use RSU5 funds to implement a bell-to-bell plan. Every available dollar dollar should go toward retaining the invaluable invaluable human resources of this district. Thank you so much.

Thank you. And Theo.

Hello. My name is Theo Lions. I'm a sophomore from Freeport. I would like to start off by saying that I do understand the current restrictions on cell phone usage and I can see how no restrictions would cause a significant problem. What I don't agree with is restrictions during students free time. Preeriods have usually been up to spend to a student's choice. I will almost always use my free periods to complete homework or assignments I'm missing.

But having no choice in how I spend my time feels overly restrictive and makes every hour feel longer.

I would also like to say that phones do have uses in school as a couple other people have mentioned. Uh, one I've used personally is it is using a phone as a graphing calculator. A TI84 can cost between $80 to $100, which is a cost that is completely removed by using a phone instead.

I also have a personal experience with using a phone productive way during a photography class. We can use phones to take photos or edit them and it removes multiple steps in the process of taking digital photos off the digital camera.

and uploading them to the laptops.

I'd like to also speak specifically on yonder pouches or any other phone pouch as a policy. Like to state that they are expensive and the money should be spent on students rather than enforcing them.

There are multiple ways of using the funding. They're also easily bypassed through things like magnets or pencils.

So even if they were implemented, which I believe they should not be, they should they still very much likely very uh it is still likely that they may not be effective.

I recently found a study coming out of Florida. I don't have it cited here but I can find it if you need that uh it dramat it shows dramatic increase in disciplinary issues surrounding phones for about a year after a total bell-to-bell ban.

The study showed about a double or a 100% increase to detentions and suspensions related to phone use.

Finally, I would like to say that the world is using more technology than ever and will likely not stop doing so.

I think that instead of restricting our technology during school, we should instead use we should instead learn how to use it effectively and how to incorporate it to make our work more efficient. Thank you. Thank you, Theo.

All right, that was everyone I had on my list. Did we miss anyone who wanted to speak? Okay, thank you.

All right, carrying on with our agenda.

Item eight, uh, report from the superintendent.

Good evening, everybody. Um, first I would like to really genuinely thank people who have come here to advocate tonight for whatever you're advocating for. It's a range of topics.

Maria, I was so impressed with the way you presented tonight. This is not part of my written remarks, by the way. Um, but I was a teacher for a long time who taught specifically kids how to be civically active. And I've seen that tonight. And one of the primary skills that is embedded in that is for everybody here to be able to tolerate when somebody else is respectfully saying that they think you're wrong. And that's what I'm seeing here tonight. And so well done truly.

So onward, boy, it's been cold.

Um I am just really glad that my last last week when we had a snow day that I made the right call because it was the first time I ever had to do that. And it was part of being superintendent.

It was a little bit of a nailbiter. Um, and it was my f also, you know, it was my first time doing it, but it was also my first time group texting with all the other superintendents in the region about like, "What are you going to do?

What are you going to do? What are you going to do?" I I was actually the first one at 4:30 that morning to say, "We're just not having school." And then everybody else was like, "Us too, us two. Us two." So, yeah. Um, I do hope that we won't have to do too many more of those because just looking ahead at the calendar right now with that one school day, our last student day will be uh Wednesday, June 17th. And if you're looking ahead of that, if we have one more, that puts our last student day at Thursday, June 18th, which puts us right up against Junth, which means if we have more than one more snow day, we're going like at into the next week, which just kind of stinks for everybody. Um, but you know, we'll do what we have to do.

Um, I'd like to just talk a little bit more about the budget. um everyone's favorite topic these days. Um it has been identified that it's a tough budget year. Um I met with the administrators this morning. We had one of our regular meetings and you know we are sensitive to the fact that everybody is sort of waiting with baited breath about what exactly that means. Um, at at this point I think it's no mystery that it means that what come January I'm going to have to propose a budget that has reductions in it. Um, and we are not ready yet to say specifically what those would be, but we're digging into those and things that we are considering are in every school. They're not necessarily evenly in every school. Um, but they are keeping in mind the criteria of equity and being forward thinking and being fair and and creating the least disruption for kids. And in in due time, which will not be very long, I will have more specific proposals for you. Um to remind everybody when we last when we met last month for a special session on the budget um the guidance from the board which I very much appreciated was to bring you three tiers uh at basically increases of six seven and 8% over last year. um with with with without that I would be bringing forward a status quo budget that would be 10% or perhaps even more depending on other factors that we don't know about and how they come in.

Um the way I've kind of framed that for school leaders as they think about what to do in their schools, I've used this orchard metaphor. So that 8% level that you've talked about is the lowhanging fruit. The 7% which is in the middle is pruning the orchard and the six% is redesigning the orchard. Um so looking at it that way is helping us think about every possible way to reduce in a fair and deliberate and thoughtful way. I do I I feel a need to point out and this may take more than one instance of being explained because it's just a bit more complex that those tears as school leaders look at their budgets will not necessarily directly translate into the way I bring you a budget because when that happens the lens changes. It changes from looking looking at my school and thinking about how much change is in my own one school versus across the district where is there where is there room for more reduction than in other places? It's not even and part of that has to do with history and how we got from where we were over the course of time to where we are now. But I I'm just I'm hope that I'm explaining that in a spirit of transparency so that people know the thinking that's going into this. Um that is what you'll see in January and February when I present a budget to you.

Um I recently wrote a column for the forecaster. Um and I in I don't know if anybody here has read it yet, but Colin, you gave me something to think about. Did you read the my article yet? Oh well, no. No, I haven't. Well, thank you.

Send us the link. Um, it's on it's it's on the website.

There's a little thing on How many websites are on the web? Like there's a little thing on the website called the superintendent's journal or superintendent's notebook and it's in there.

Um, but at when we had that meeting, Colin said budgets are moral documents. And I know you were citing somebody, Colin, and I can't remember who you were citing, but that thought and the way you articulated it did stay with me. Um I think it's very piffy and it well I mean it gets right to the heart of it. Um and it this is sort of what I talked about in my forecaster article is that when we are creating a budget we are articulating what we value and every line item in that budget says something about who we are um and what we believe that the kids and their families deserve. And I just I feel that I need to as an administrator in charge of this. I I I need to point out the big picture that when we do this work, this is this is not fun. Nobody in the room doing this is this is just not a fun year. The fun budget years are when you can think about things that you want to add and grow.

And we are still thinking about that to a degree, but we know that it impacts people's lives. Nobody wants to give kids less than what they need. Also, nobody wants to burden the taxpayers to the degree that they can't bear. Um, so I think that it is in many ways fortuitous that this if we're going to have a rough budget year, it's not a bad thing for that to line up with strategic planning because it really provokes us not to think about this short-term cliff that we're facing, but to think about how to be forward- facing as a district and to make sure that we don't that we make the decisions through the lens of over the course of time. How are we being as efficient as possible? Not how do we just make a short-term decision that saves the most money right this minute, but over the course of time, how are we on the most sustainable and responsible path?

Um, to return to the work of the strategic planning committee, we have just um put out uh a version of the portrait of a graduate. I literally just heard from Erica Walstrom today of a draft of that that's ready to go out with a survey. Um so you'll be seeing that very soon. Um at the same time we are now working on finer points which is a miss a mission statement shared beliefs and core values. This all goes back to budgets and moral documents.

Um it really is not just academic. It is if we do this correctly it is a touchstone for how we think about the budget and the long-term needs of the district.

because it's going to sh a thought that another thought that has stayed with me is that right now the budget climate that we are contending with right now is the result of decisions that were made 5, 10, 15 years ago. And with that in mind, the decisions we make right now will be contended with when Michelle is still on the board 15 years from from now. Um, so as long as we keep our values in mind, we can feel good about those decisions and what we're bequaving to the folks that come after us or and some of us will still be here.

Um, we are working hard to protect both through strategic planning and also through financial thinking and planning everything that makes school not just all not all the necessaries but all the things that make it rich for kids.

music, art, PE, extracurriculars, all of these things have value and they need to be preserved to the greatest degree possible. Just all the things. Um, we are keeping an eye on class sizes. We have a policy that gives us a target for how to work with that and we're using that. Um the polic where that policy doesn't always focus us but we are paying attention to is the kids uh where kids have the most needs. Kids who are in poverty, kids who have disabilities, kids who have learning challenges, other obstacles that are much more individual and may vary from one school to another or community to another.

We're looking hard at things that are have to have versus nice to have as well. Those are hard judgments to make, but we're doing our best to make them fairly. Um, we're definitely being thoughtful and deliberate and human focused as we move forward with that.

And we know that every family in the district and in the country is facing a similar problem every single day when we go to the store. Um, so in we're all we're all facing inflation and the climate that it creates. It's real money. It comes out of real pockets. We live it too as individuals and we get it.

Um, I need to pivot to the early childhood task force for a minute to update you about that. Back in November, that task force recommended unanimously that we join cohort three for next year. Um that means that we would next year take on special education responsibilities for four-year-olds and that the year after that we would add the three-year-olds to it. Um that group meets again on December 18th. So that's next week. Some of us here in the room are on that group. Um what we will focus on in that next meeting is a model, a few options that we could um employ to step into cohort 3. So beyond the decision we want to do it, it's okay, how do we do it?

What would it look like? That's like what positions would we need to add and where would they need to go and what spaces would we use and etc etc. So that's going to the task force and um based on the task force's feedback, my hope is to bring to you something that you can also unanimously support when you meet in January. Um, we are under a bit of a timeline to be able to join cohort 3. The state had told us at first that we had until February to make that decision. Then a few weeks ago, they backed it up and said they wanted a commitment by January 2nd. I emailed them and said, "Well, okay, here's the thing." And told them about our process and that you as a board will meet on January 14th when you could approve that potentially. and they emailed me and I have it in writing that that would be fine. So that's sort of the timeline of things.

Um unless you all want to meet on the first that well that's a holiday so I won't be here but come on.

Um so these these are uh these are the things we're talking about. We're talking about budgets. We're talking about early childhood. We're also talking about a long range um as you mentioned in November, longer range plans about how to look at the district and be aspirational in that in a way that is exciting to think about for what the district could look like 10 or 15 years from now, but is also more efficient and a better experience for kids. Um that's taking up all the bandwidth right now, but that's where we are. Um before I move on to talking about hires and retirements, etc., um any quick questions for me?

Okay. Well, we do have some support staff hires. Uh Don Kareem is coming in as a 0.5 custodian at Mass Landing School. Joe Townsend is coming on as a van driver and a field maintenance person. Lucy Lloyd is coming in as a laughand teacher. We do have a um resignation Jonathan Rhodess as an edtech at Mor Street School. We have a retirement Diana Kusti at the end of the school year is a first grade teacher at Mor Street School. And as an addition to the agenda, it's not printed there.

Phyllis Laam is a school counselor at Freeport Middle School who will be retiring at the end of the school year.

Okay, thank you.

Uh, and so as you mentioned in the adjustments, we're going to defer the leadership team to do we have the future date or just some future date?

I'm hoping that we can work it in in the January first January meeting.

Okay. All right. Wonderful. Uh, so we will move on to item nine, administrator reports, and we will start with Kelly for finance.

Good evening. Um, included in your packets this evening are the expenditures through um, November 30, 2025.

Um, we don't really see any issues at this time um, with the expenditures, but we do still do still do the monthly report out. Um, one thing um, that I that I did want to mention as well um, as the superintendent talks about, we're having um, group meetings of administrators. We're also working through um we started them last week, we've done a few this week, and we'll be finishing up next week. We're meeting individually um with each principal and director as well um gathering um their requests and information. I'm in the midst of compiling those as they come in um so that we can then work again as a team once we kind of have like that final number um on so we can work on the scenarios with um Superintendent Gray.

[Music] questions for Kelly. Thank you.

All right, so we will move on to item 9B, which is an update from the technology department in goal review. Sam Rigby.

Hi everyone.

Uh, I promise I'm keep I cut my hair too short this weekend and I'm just very cold all the time now. So I promise I'm not being disrespectful. I'm just freezing. Um, uh, all right. Um, now that you're warmed up, uh, no. Uh, so, uh, thinking about goals from last year. Um, and I can do this however you want. I'm open to questions or however you like, but, um, last year we picked some goals that were a bit more ambitious, um, and a little bit, um, I guess fuzzier in terms of how you would measure success. Um, I would like to say that we were successful in achieving them, but I also, you know, this is a public forum and I don't want to lie on camera. So, I would say that we were not all that successful um in kind of achieving those goals. I think some of that was um probably a misaluation of um the scope and the amount of time that we had um and and and then also position expertise um particularly around uh technology integration. That's something that I have spent a lot of my career doing, but it's not um something that anyone on my team has much experience. They're more kind of on the nuts and bolts support side of things. and um and I just did not have as much time as I would have liked um to spend on that last year. So um around communication, we did sort of uh get more community communication that seems redundant, but um uh I suppose those are different things. Um uh but it was generally around like major issues um like the power school data breach among other things. I'm sure all of the parents who are on the board or are watching at home probably uh got tired of seeing the same information from me over and over and over again.

But um that that was kind of I think we were successful in certain ways. Um but we um it was not it was much more reactive than I would like to be. So that's something that we're continuing to work on at this moment in time. Any questions about stuff from last year?

Cara?

Um, thanks for your honesty. Sure. And in your report. I really appreciated reading the the reflection.

Um, and in that you end saying that you hope to further prioritize um these things coming uh going forward.

And I'm wondering what's providing you that hope like what what might be different this year? Just like a deep down sense of optimism, I guess. Um I I don't uh no I think um in terms of you know focusing on um on technology integration you know we're considering uh device changes in grades 6 through 8 and and 9 through 12 and we're running pilot programs and so I'm having to um we're going to be running pilot programs I should say after after um school vacation and um I should say that uh I I I have I don't have much of a choice to be honest. Uh that's part of it is that we I really need to be um much more I have to put other stuff on the back burner and focus more on this while we're trying to evaluate the devices that we are going to I don't know hopefully use moving forward. So yeah, so that's that's that's that and you know yeah a deep sense of optimism just as a person. I guess you also did have a fair amount of I mean I won't say one time because there's always projects to be done but you had a pretty heavy lift.

Yes.

Um in the past year with some of the upgrades and the capital projects that were in process.

Yeah. Yeah. And we did for those of you who are were not on the board and weren't part of this process last year, we um we kind of were we were taking a bunch of systems from like zero to one um so to speak, you know. So, um adding security cameras, uh across the district, um converting old security camera systems to new ones. Um uh we're still working through access control projects at the moment, um which is like badging into buildings, as well as, you know, door security, scheduled unlock and and locking, which we have in a couple of buildings, but not most of the buildings. Um and uh new phones and PA and intercom systems. So, we we did a lot last summer. like it was not it was not for uh uh not hitting these goals was not for lack of um it we weren't sitting around you know uh it was just more it was more other things became the became greater priority any other comments or questions before he moves on to next year I appreciate none of you rubbing it in my face because at least I know Colin and Cara last year said your goals seemed too ambitious And I was like, "No, no, no. We got this." They just gave you the I told you so eyes.

I know. I know. I know. It was just a look, you know. Um All right. So, for uh this coming year, um we've chosen some goals that are a bit more um I guess more easily measurable. Um that also are aligned with work that we are definitely going to be, you know, that has to get done. Um, you know, part of that is, um, licking my wounds after this past year and part of it is, you know, I wanted to, um, uh, you know, it's important that these things get done, you know, and these are these are big priorities for us this year. So, um, working, you know, I mentioned the access control projects and and the work on those is ongoing. Um, we're hoping to bring on a couple of systems over the holiday break. Um, hopefully the middle school and more street, but not I don't have that double confirmed yet. Um, and that's been a a big lift. Um, we had we had a change in project managers and um, you know, it's just it's been a lot of work, but it's it's one of those things that is like um, it's one of those things that I guess it it uh, you know, you you're like how how important or you know or how uh, how interesting is it like you know, figuring out badging into buildings? Um, but I'll tell you, at least for me, it's more interesting than you would guess. Um, uh, but, um, it's been, you know, it's it's it's going well and I and I we're on target to to take care of all of that work before, um, hopefully before the end of the school year, but kind of bringing a couple schools on during each school vacation over the course of the year. Um, and then, uh, our second goal is, um, replacing the Wi-Fi at Freeport High School. Um, we are in a situation that is not really of our own making, but um, the the equipment that we're using at Freeport High School is end of life in January 2007, sorry, 2027. Um, so we this is just one of those like it has to happen. Um, this this equipment was has been purchased or or is on order um for out of this current year's budget cycle uh, the FY26 budget cycle. So, we are in we we've landed a bunch of that equipment and we are on pace to get that taken care of over the course of the year.

Other questions?

So, the evidence of effectiveness is like what you will see. So, when it says Freeport survey shows 100% instructional that that hasn't happened yet, but that's how we'll know if this is done.

Yes. Okay, great. Thank you. Cara Colin, how do you feel about it this year?

Valerie, can you hear me? Yeah.

Okay, excellent. Because last time my mic was not cooperating. Um, so this equipment life cycle, is that something that we'll build into the budget as an ongoing? Yes.

Recurring? Yes. Yeah. So, so yeah, Wi-Fi equipment depending on what you're buying and where you're buying from is sort of like a five to six year cycle.

Um, and it doesn't work out, you know, the it would be great if like all of our schools were sort of the same size and and we could have these, you know, okay, we're on a five or six year cycle and we do one school per year. It doesn't really work out that way. Um, but yes is the short answer and you will see a figure in the budget representing doing some of that work in some of the other buildings this year.

Yep. Thank you. Other comments or Yep. Kelly.

I understand that the tension between not being too ambitious and, you know, wanting to do some of the things that you did incorporate into the goals for last year. And I was me I was looking in particular at the the comment that you did hope to further prioritize increasing your um presence with educators and I was just wondering even though that's not one of your specified goals if you do have some thoughts about how you might be able to do that. Yeah, I mean I it's it's kind of already happened this year sort of naturally. Um part of that through you know um thinking through iPad pilots. Um and so I've been meeting with more staff then um I've been meeting with more teaching staff and working through some of that some of the the thoughts around that and doing a lot of listening about concerns and things like that. Um, not to not to belittle that, that's important. But, um, uh, but also the um, uh, I ran I ran more PD this year at, you know, at the start of this year. I ran more PD than, um, I have in any in my other my previous two years here. Um, I ran PD sessions for each building. And then I'm, I'm doing some PD with the high school starting next week. So, it's kind of happening naturally. Um, it's happening organically. Um, and then some of the stuff that we're that we have to do is also leading to to more of that as well.

Yep. Anything else for Sam? Thank you.

Yeah. Oh, yeah. You're not off the hook.

You're next again. All right. So, we will move on to 9C, which is the use of AI in schools. And Erica and Sam, I believe, are tag teaming this. And you're going to Oh, thanks. I totally forgot I did that.

So, I'm going to put this on the projector, but I You have all of the slides, so you don't need to you don't need to turn around. I mean, you can if you want, but you don't.

Yeah. Yeah.

Get comfortable, enjoy the show, all that. Uh, okay. Uh, hold on. Let me just make sure I'm on do not disturb.

Do you want me to just Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Sure. Yeah.

The age of AI and what it means for RC5.

No. Uh uh yeah. Sorry. All right. Uh no no no.

Uh so um what we're going to what the way this this presentation is going to be structured um you know the prompt that you all asked for us I believe is was about um what's happening in our schools now and what are some paths forward. So, we're going to take some time looking at data on what's happening in schools now, at least from the teachers perspectives. Um, and then, uh, we will move on to, you know, a couple options for visions down the line or or or what we could do as sort of first steps in a right direction.

So, um, I'm not going to talk through all of these graphs. Um, but I will point out I'll point out some stuff that I thought was interesting. Um, with here where we were asking staff about how much they're using AI tools for their own work. Um, I was surprised, frankly, I was surprised that it was uh, you know, that it was 10% was daily. I would have guessed that that was much higher personally. Yeah.

Do you have any kind of data on how that breaks out among where they are in the education system?

We do and I I do, but also like as you'll see there's like 15 graphs here and I thought it was going to be far too it was going to be far too much to be like all right so at PO we've got uh moving on to mass lighting. So um I I didn't want to I didn't want to delve that deeply but yes we did survey based on where people are and what their grade and the grade spans as well.

Did you see more use on a higher grade level or was it pretty evenly split?

Yes, across the board. Yep. Across the board for sure. Um and that and that and that is both that is both for students and staff. Yep. Um I personally and I guess I'll I'll put this out there.

There's a slide down there that like what sticks out to you. if you have like questions and things like that, um I'm happy to answer them in the flow, but also if you've got stuff like stuff that you notice or sticks out to you, um let's uh I don't know, write them down.

Write them down or or raise your hand and ask. I'm happy to answer as we go.

But either way, just be thinking about that. What's what's sticking out to you.

Um the uh the use here was, I think, not wholly not not terribly surprising. you know, brainstorming, writing emails and reports, um, and creating instructional materials. Um, I the the the thing that I was surprised to see forth was differentiation or accommodations. And I think that that is really kind of in thinking about uses of AI. I think that that's like a really tremendous use um for a teacher who might be, you know, might be working through um with a student that they they haven't found the right the the you know, the right um strategies with and uh I was, you know, happy to see that.

Um so yeah, I mean I guess it'll be up to you. We all know what the AI like email writing style is. So, you know, you'll know when your te when your your kid's uh teacher is sending you an AI generated email. Um they all they all sound exactly the same or look exactly the same. Um I but that said, I mean, I think there are in thinking about efficiencies, there are efficiencies there. Um this was also I I I'm not stunned by this distribution. Um, but I was surprised I I guess I'm surprised at how many people are, you know, considered it not effective. And granted, I I should say this is this was about a hundred staff member about 100 staff responses.

Um, and it was not like evenly distributed across buildings, you know, it wasn't like I think it was about 20% from the high school, 20% at the middle school level or 25% at the middle school level and then the remainder at K5, preK through 5.

Um, so this is where it gets interesting.

Um, so keep in mind that this is K, this is preK through 12. So the uh the weekly and daily being almost 50% or more than 50% excuse me that is I'm not shocked by that number. Um I think the uh and a lot of the never is students at the the prek through five level. That's a big portion of of the responses there. So yeah, this this is yes, this is this is basically to your knowledge, how often are students using AI tools in school or for school work? Yep.

Excuse me. Uh observe student usage similar similar kind of um similar well some similar answers. uh writing assistance or to all all to you know fully bypass uh assignments or or you know copying AI generated work. Those are the the two big ones. Not not wholly surprising. Um, I was I guess I was sort of hoping to see a little bit more in like student in some of these where students are using them as um tools as opposed to something that is outright, you know, uh and and again this is the perspective of from teachers. So this might not be this might not be um a perfect correlation. Um, but we contemplated surveying students and no offense to the students in the in the audience, but no matter how no matter how uh when when we when we thought about it, um, no matter what guarantee we could give of anonymity, we just weren't sure what the that we would get um we weren't sure that we we would get like full fully honest responses. That's not to say that students would lie on that survey necessarily, but more to more to say that um it's in their interest to uh be nervous about something like that. You are right to if I if I were to send out that email to students, I could see who clicked on the survey and answered the survey. So, um regardless of whether or not it was recording your responses, yes. Yes. Correct. Correct. To get Yes.

Right. Right. To get something that was truly honest and not trackable, we would need to be doing something like that. Uh but yeah, no, I I I was um I guess I I would have thought that, you know, homework help or revision assistance or brainstorming, I would I would have thought that those would have been granted they're represented here, but I would have thought that that would have been more of the use that we would see as opposed to um something that, you know, at least how teachers observe it.

Um something where there's, you know, it's really doing a lot of the work for them or writing a lot of the work for them.

Uh okay. So how are this? This is kind of a so that was more teacher observed use of student uh for students with AI. This is teacher permitted use.

So again important to remember that this is um this is this survey was is prek through 12. So um the uh not not hugely surprising here. We did not have a single person answer yes for most assignments and I know that there are teachers in the high school who are you know who are embracing this and are offering it as a tool and are allowing students to use it for certain assignments. Um but it is not yet we're no we don't have anyone in the district at least through my observation but also through responses to the survey who is saying yes please use use AI whenever you want for any assignment or for most assignments.

Um yeah uh again acceptable use um here for teachers not uh not wholly surprising the that where it cuts off is generating content with attribution. Um so that was sort of the one that was the one instance of like you know somebody somebody saying yes I will allow a student you know to enter a prompt and generate work and turn that work into generate something from AI and turn that into me as though it is the work that they've done we did one person with attribution so and and you know I don't know I I could go digging in the data and find that try to find that person. Um but but I'm not I'm not I'm personally I'm personally not interested in a witch hunt. Um but I could you know uh no. Um uh okay. So these perspectives are I I think you know this is none of this is surprising here. Um uh we do have a a significant contingent. Um the environmental concerns, not that that isn't a concern to me, but I just I was surprised that almost 40% of people and this was like select all that apply. So, you know, this isn't this is a distribution over how many people um how many you know any somebody could have checked all of these options. Um I was surprised that we were nearly 40% with that. Not that that isn't something that I've thought about, but it just you know um it's understandable. Environmental concerns.

So um uh energy usage and then water usage for cooling uh in data centers. Yep. Yep. Yep.

Among other things. I'm sure there are others. Yeah. Valerie, sorry. Um was anything regarding mental health and use of chat bots included as an option or It was not. It was not. But but I see where you're going. Yep.

So um talking about ethical uses of AI um so this I I will say the overwhelming majority this is this is people who answered this question with something the percentages here are people who answered this question with something other than this is not part of my job which was one of the answers but that that was like the overwhelming majority um because I think for the for the prek through five teachers, they were sort of looking at this like we're not using this and teaching students about AI AI ethics isn't something that we that I that is I view as part of my job. So these these are the people who um who did who who responded something other than that um uh I was I guess I was a little surprised to uh to see these numbers that that this is something that is being included in instruction with where students are using AI or where teachers are using AI. Um, I would have thought that no would have been higher, but I was glad to see it wasn't.

Uh, and then these are the topics and and obviously this makes sense, but you know, act the the topics that people are are talking about. Um, uh, but academic honesty and plagiarism sort of running away with it here.

All right. So, um, this was a a little bit more of a Yeah, Colin's laughing. Uh uh this was a a little bit more of a um just like okay what if if we are if we take it as given that you know we would be teaching students about AI ethics and you would be involved in that how confident are you I this isn't again not not surprising that most of the teachers don't feel particularly confident in this in teaching this.

Yeah, may maybe they maybe maybe they can run some PD, you know. Um uh yeah. Uh and then these were we asked an open-ended question um for for staff about what their con what their concerns are. So lots of critical thinking, cheating and plagiarism. Obviously misinformation was came up more often than I than I I guess I would have thought. Um, privacy, safety, to your question, Valerie, you know, um, uh, you know, I view that mental health aspect of use of use of AI as sort of a safety concern. And then developmental concerns and increased screen times with younger kids. So, yeah.

Um, I put this in there, but I'm not going to we can we can you can either ask questions now or we can do questions later. I don't know.

Yeah, let's do it later. Okay.

All right. So, now I'm gonna turn it over to Erica on some ideas on where we can go from here.

Okay. So, um Sam and I met with Angela Marzili. If you were at the superintendence or sorry, the the winter convocation, you might have attended her session. Um she's with the day of AI from MIT. um she's a consulting representative there and she's a main resident and works uh across the country. So um having I think Sam and I have both done a little bit of this work systemically, but uh I've previously done this with Angela's support and others um in another district. And so we we found her to be an excellent resource and she directed us to some free resources that might guide some of our what do we do next steps. Um, so I thought it would be good to ground like what do we do next in something that is researchbased, peer-reviewed, practiced elsewhere. Um, instead of just like imagining all of those things into being. Um, this isn't to say that we're branding this as a solution, but it's nice that it's free. Um, there are ways you can pay for their support as well.

Um, this is the uh the founder of that entity, uh, Dr. Cynthia Brezelle, I believe is how you pron pronounce it. um and a quote from her to get us started.

Um and the genie is officially out of the bottle. Um okay, so some commentary from them about why AI integration matters. And I think we know this from some of that data that you've um just seen, but we know it from our own human lived experience that um AI is transforming everything. Kids are already using it and um statistically less than 10% of schools have formal policies. We'll get into that a little bit more. That's for what it's worth.

We're not recommending that there be a usage policy, but perhaps there be some guidance offering us direction. Um, so we'll get into that a little bit more.

Um, our responsibility is really to do more preparation, more formal preparation, and ensure that there is equitable access. There's an equity issue behind some of this as well.

Ensuring that we have um students prepared in it with equal opportunity to utilize the tools that come through AI.

Um and then for us to model responsible and ethical use um as the providers for kids in our settings. Um so foundational resources that we can capture through MIT Day of AI. Um, there's free hands-on curriculum if we were to run um to run some programming um across vertically across the grade levels that's developmentally appropriate and constantly under revision. Um that is available to us open source. Um the curriculum modules that they offer involve those things listed there. How AI works um chat GPT AI social media and then um science and climate change. And some of that gets into the the environmental impact area that came up at 40%. Um so uh this is just their model and a lot of this is for staff facing but it then has the the effect that it is brought into the staff's design for instruction.

So um a recommendation if we were to take a phased implementation might be that we build a foundation of through teacher training um understanding capabilities and limitations and this kind of came through in how confident do you feel um in that in that data. So it does feel like that would be an appropriate starting place like assume no prior knowledge and go from there. Um and then classroom integration. That's that piece where after the teachers learn um what does it mean for them in terms of their instructional design and informing academic integrity conversations at throughout the age levels um advanced practice getting better just getting better at using the tools whether we're using a walled garden approach which is like um something like uh magic school which is uh which is a kind of a closed circuit where everything is sort of filtered embedded or if we're just instru structing how to use the worldwide web for that. So, um there are multiple ways to go about it. Um if we were looking at develop developmental appropriateness, these are kind of the broad brush areas for elementary, middle, and high school.

Um some sort of descriptive learning goals there on the right. Um what we're hoping to gain uh for student opportunity.

um clearer guiding framework that comes through the MIT um uh day of AI work. Um we'd want to land in a place where we have guiding documents that we can lean on, but they might not necessarily be like etched in policy. They're just policy may say, you know, we should have a we should have procedures that address these things. um because this is a very rapidly involving evolving area and to get locked in feels like not helpful. Um but we can get better tuned in some of these areas listed here and then there are things we probably haven't imagined yet. Um at every stage of the process, stakeholder engagement is important. Um and so this ecosystem of communication about um what are we facing, what are we trying to solve, and what are we um how is it going? Um the equity piece specifically um the challenge we're up against uh what it means for accessibility what what we saw in instructional design in the data is that some teachers are using it for lesson planning. This can be really really helpful in goal writing for students who are who are working to accomplish more than one year's growth in a year or students who are accessing beyond grade level content. So their teachers can bring in um learning expectations and clearly articulated goals to know that they are accessing very scientifically what what that student needs um to be expert at all those grade levels can be challenging. So these tools can be very very helpful in the instructional domain as well. Um these are the seven uh principles for AI and education from the UN. um they have a document on this and um some of their work is brought into the MIT work. So thought that was interesting. Um and then just a point that this is in all areas of our our kiddos learning opportunities.

It does not live in just you know writing papers in English class. So um these are some examples of where that lives. um what it might look like for a road map if we were to do this and we can go slow or fast um or push it out however we decide to do it. But the initial step might be a task force beginning then with um MIT day of AI training um and then drafting some of those guiding documents um running them through the task force um bringing them back to the board um auditing our technology access. I we've done a little bit of an entry level of that but feels like there's probably some more when it comes to the behavioral health pieces and some other things. Um and then about eight months out if we were to pilot some day of AI curriculum which is like kids practicing with intention and with like with uh stewardship um in mind ushering them through AI experiences in a in a sheltered manner that might be something we might pilot and then a year out um if this were a timeline it doesn't need to be like this but um that we would have spec subject specific integration so like this really intentional approach across developmental spans, you know, to make sure that we are um advancing these opportunities for all kids and making those safety elements um very clear. Um success indicators would be that all teachers would be trained. Um a 100% of students would graduate with a with a basic AI literacy from RSU5 schools and um we would have clear guiding documents that would be under constant evolution um and that we would have community support for our work.

Um I thought this was important to pull up for your reference.

um Maine does not actually have digital literacy or computer science standards.

Um and so that is we're not alone in that sort of you know wild west environment but we have um we do have some other states who have taken this on. Um it happens in a variety of ways.

Uh meaning do they take on computer science? Do they take on digital literacy? Is it very detailed? Is it not? Some of them get to where they have them as graduation requirements, but I just wanted to quantify it. 32 states have these standards. 12 of them have them for graduation requirements. And then what we would be drawing on to ensure that we have this um articulation uh with a research backing would be these bodies named here. Common sense education, CSTA standards, ISTY standards and then the MIT day of AI is really a leader in this field right now as well. Who knows maybe others will join. Right. So um that is um yeah um so next steps thinking maybe a task force another one um beginning educator training with MIT day of AI and then um drafting initial guiding guiding documents uh for you to review at some stage. So we're happy to take your questions. Yeah.

I'm just curious as we're thinking about the process and what it might look like.

Um, you mentioned that all of the things you've talked about today in this presentation were free through data AI training, but there were also additional training resources available and I'm just cur that that are that cost money and I'm just curious if um as we're going through this process of thinking what this looks like, what do the additional paid resources look like and how they would actually help us meet our success indicators? So just kind of something to be thinking about.

So we can engage PD um supported facilitation from day of AI like Angela Marzili could come here and support us um to do some of that delivery of professional development. Other areas could be investing in something like magic school AI, which is like I'm branding it, but it's a walled garden for potentially students and teachers to engage in AI based investigation with filters and safety features. Um, so there can be things and there can be people. Yeah. Did that answer your question?

Yeah, it sort of I guess um it's not necessarily something we have to decide right now. I'm just thinking as we're going through the process and as we're entering into budget season eventually, these are things that we would want to be thinking about as we look at future budgets and whether they're worth the investment.

It it does live in my draft. We'll see if it makes it through. Yes.

Yeah. It seems to me that the the place we need to start is is kind of the um building the comfort and knowledge of the staff.

um you know when you look at who's using it already versus you know when the kids are already using it more than the adults are there's clearly some catchup that has to happen right um and you know the sort of things I noticed is sort of the discrepancy between you know we know they're using it and you know 35% of us are using it but very few of us are actually like talking about the ethics of AI and you know how of how maybe it should be used appropriately and um you know it it is a tool um that is obviously very powerful in used for good and not evil. So um you know getting people comfortable with what are the ways they could use it for you know for me some of those graphs were like writing assistance really high revision assistance really low I mean those two things to me are very similar right so what I consider assistance might be I wrote it and I want them to help me to figure out if it's you know clear what I'm saying clearly it's not because I'm never clear but um you know just getting people comfortable with what's available to them um and I don't know I mean I I know we have PD budgets that we and PD days that we fill. Um there's lots of things vying for that time. I mean to me that seems the natural place to start for something like this. Um and I don't know if you can use the free resources for something like that or if that is something like Kelly said, you have to bring in somebody or a train the trainer kind of process. My Yeah. No, I I I think you're right to um you're that you're having trouble with that sign tonight. Um uh uh no I I I think you're you're right. You're right. You're right to identify, you know, professional development is really kind of the is not necessarily step number one because I think we need we need expertise with from each from all of the buildings and grade levels to kind of help inform some of this. I can I can come up with whatever ideas I want, but um I'm also I'm not the one who has to implement them or live with them necessarily. Um uh so but I think starting with starting with professional development and trying to identify the times that we that we do have and and when we can focus on this is a point taken you know um this is really helpful. Thank you.

And I think it's really good timing too with our strategic planning process. And as we'll see soon in the portrait of the graduate, one of those components is that students are graduating future ready. So there's a future readiness component and um the landscape of education and the workplace is changing really really rapidly. So I think I'm feeling a sense of urgency around this and I would support the development of a task force and would really appreciate um this being a regular topic that we we hear about uh on the board. Um, and there was something else I was going to say and it's gone.

I think part of whatever we end up doing, we also need to consider stewardship and identifying when it's responsible, when it's irresponsible, and when it might be I mean, circling back to cell phones, it might be too much. um when we're leaning too heavily on it. I think stewardship is super important and isn't something that we use enough in our lives generally of of making sure that we're being thoughtful of when we use our tools and using them appropriately.

Yeah. And and I think from the staff perspective, I I I don't I don't think we're at risk of that now, but I can I understand your perspective of kind of keeping that top of mind.

Um, I was just curious, um, as you surveyed the staff if there was any feedback about what they would actually want in terms of professional development. Um, I mean there's so much that can be done and just in what we saw um just now, but really what would be most helpful for them both in their teaching but in their in the classroom but also in their in their prep and and the work that goes on outside of the actual teaching part. I think I think where st what staff are and granted this was like 97 people answering open-ended responses so you know I read through them but um but I I I it's perhaps certain things are weighted in my mind a little bit heavier than they would be otherwise or than they might be to somebody else but um the the thing that stuck out to me was there were there's a lot of staff that don't know where to start and and just kind of just kind of starting just getting help of getting, you know, getting off the ground or what are some things that I could, you know, everybody says that this is going to make me more efficient. Give me something that I can do with it, you know, and that that was the that was the big thing. It was and um I also and and then to the to the discussion about AI ethics or really teaching students about AI, I think that that's the other the the other component where staff are not particularly a lot of staff are not not all that com comfortable Um, as we're going through the process of putting together this plan and the guiding documents, we've talked a little bit about the the educator facing piece and we've talked about the studentf facing piece. And as a parent who sometimes feel like I struggle to keep up with what my kids are doing and how they're using these tools, I'm just thinking um it would be really nice if we could keep in mind the the parent facing piece too and how we can educate our parents about what their students are doing with these tools and how the parents could support them and help guide their them in their ethical decisions about them. So just something to keep in mind.

Yep. And we we do have a lot of um I will say a lot of this stuff is blocked on student devices um on devices that we provide for students. That was kind of that was done before uh before I came here and it's kind of been something that we've continued um with opening certain things up depending on what it being used for on a project basis and that that's kind of how it's been treated. Yep.

Yeah. I I guess I'm what I'm really trying to get at is more like sort of a training or a a PD for parents so to speak so that we can as parents understand how these tools work so we can support our students. Yeah, sure. Cara.

Yeah, that was the other thing I was going to say that came out of my head.

Um I recognize when on the slide about professional learning, it says parent and community engagement throughout all phases. So I was curious if you can say more about that because I think that is also really important.

Yeah, I think um it's the check-ins with bringing those representative stakeholder representatives both into the task force and then also checking to see how it's going um and getting feedback as to like what others are seeing. Um I think it's really interesting to have kids more proficient in something than teachers. Um, and I feel like we there is a there is a sense of urgency to make sure that we aren't so many steps behind. And I think that that's not too dissimilar from a lot where a lot of parents are. Um, but taking stock of where everybody what everybody needs right now and then staying up with the the evolution because it's going to grab change. Um, so I'm not sure what it all looks like because I'm not sure what all the there there is, but like we have um if we have a task force, it probably wouldn't be disbanded for some time. I think there's a lot of work to do here. Um, and parents are part of it. The stakeholder group called parents is something that can't be left out of this equation. Um how much we are able to provide direct support might be somewhat limited but offering opportunities for learning is is certainly something we can we can ensure.

There might also be some parent experts some people in the community who have a lot of experience with this and might be able to offer something.

Absolutely.

Coline's quick. I just was going to say that one of the breakout sessions that I went to at the MSMA conference was a day of AI breakout session and it was really um enlightening and helpful and really well done. So I just wanted to add that voice.

Um yeah, a couple couple things. First, thank you so much for this work. It is so appreciated and so helpful and so just thank you immeasurably for that.

Uh, two, yes, we need a task force.

Let's do that. Um, maybe we just call it something else like just a like a club, like a cool like where the cool kids hang out. I don't know. Sort of change.

We think about the branding. Third, I think I'm just going to stand over here in the weird uncle corner. Um, which is what this sit seat is, just to be clear.

Um, that Jenny put me in again. Um this seat right now is me saying like I um this is awesome. Also my general sense is that like in 5 years education is going to look nothing like what it looks like today. And this is like this is like 5% of that. And that is not said in any way as any sort of criticism. um that is just um that's based on um some that's based on my reading on the subject and also just based on my experience in the classroom.

I mean, what h what I've had to change in terms of my teaching um of uh English and the humanities um over the last year, what I've had to shift in order to respond to even just like the spectre of this um is profound in terms of thinking about um why are we uh what is a class for? Um why do we assign papers to be written in the first place? um what are the skills that we believe are necessary in order to create that um that paper? How is it that we when we as teachers are getting um work from students, how are we actually uh how are we trained to respond to something that has been generated partially by a student and partially by um uh robots.

Um, so I think I just want to say that like I think this is a much bigger thing and I think it I think we um uh we owe it to ourselves as a as a district to just like approach it that way. Um so I think like yes, I think like within 3 months like let's set up a task force.

let's get some um resources in here because I think you're absolutely right that I think most staff is probably just in a position of saying like not even just aware of like what the current technology is um and what are the benefits and what are the potential um challenges but I think just like I don't know I think we just have to have like a really much higher level um view of that and I know there are other folks that are thinking about it um but I also know that like the technology is changing so much um that it's hard to exactly know what to aim for. Um so again, I think I'll just just want to mark this territory to just be like it's a really big it's like printing press like big like in terms of what's of what's uh changing in terms of education and in terms in terms of the working world um and in terms of like what the human being does with their time. Um, so, uh, love Colin would probably not benefit us to stick our heads in the sand.

So, um, I'm curious if Maria has any insights from the student perspective because it does sound like we have a broad spectrum of approaches from teachers. I don't know if you've ever had any teachers that have been okay with the use of AI or or have given you guidance or I'm just curious. I mean, and if you're like, I don't really not prepared to speak to that, that's totally fine, but just wanted to see.

I definitely have quite a few classmates who use it to, you know, bypass and to copy often to cheat. But I also have a large majority of people that use to help study, to create test questions for them and help prepare them for tests.

And I think that it can be used really well and be really helpful, but at the same time can um stop independent thought and things like that. And so I think this is a super important thing to talk about and to get teachers and students more informed about. I think it's definitely a hard line to walk of when is it responsible and irresponsible to use it.

But yeah, I think it can be used student to student of good or bad things like that. Do you think that um do you think that having a more systemic discussion about AI in general might help maybe dissuade some of the copy and pasters? I mean, and and there that will always be the case, right? Like whether I copy off of Kelly's or I plug it into Chad GBT, like that's always that's always a thing that we're going to deal with. Um, but I'm wondering, you know, if it was something that we talked about more, if we talked about the ethics of it, we talked about appropriate use versus inappropriate use a little more um globally in in the schools as opposed to what appears to be very oneoff. Um, if that might help direct people to using it for good.

I think students will do whatever they want to do. I think it could definitely help inform students and maybe change their perspective on this kind of thing.

But um at the end of the day, it's what people want to do. And I I hope that that would be the case, but I think some groups of people maybe wouldn't even open an email that enforce that or things like that.

Maria revealing herself to be a bit of a pessimist, I guess. Uh uh no, I'm sorry.

Uh uh yeah. Yeah, perhaps. Perhaps. Um uh the thing that the the thing I wanted to add is that I also um I think this looks really it looks really different at every kind of grad span. So what this is what either whether it's appropriate use or what is being taught about AI or how we're talking about ethics all of that stuff is very different in a kindergarten classroom from a third grade classroom from a sixth grade classroom from a nth grade classroom and probably up into the you know even the difference between working with nth graders and working with 12th graders on this sort of thing. And so I don't know what the I I you know we're we this was sort of step one is kind of making this proposal um or or kind of disclosing this information and making you know starting the conversation. Um but in terms of structure I just want to note that that having having a task force of 30 people it who are across a broad group might not necessarily make sense in terms of structure and I just want to mention that to mention it. It might be that when we dig into this, this really needs to be more focused on specific grade spans and there's going to be people who are floating between those groups. But I'm just mentioning that mentioning that to mention that.

Yeah, I'm I'm feeling a lot of parallels when we're talking about, you know, when we're talking about the cell phone use and not just when do you use it and when do you not use it because that's the rule. It's like what's appropriate use, what is too much, what is what are the addictive tendencies that come out of it, right? Like they're all very similar, right? I mean, have we ever had a technology like committee or task force? Because I feel like a lot of these things are parallel in terms of, you know, staying trying to stay ahead. We're already behind clearly. Um, but like trying to stay ahead of, you know, what's available, what tools should we be teaching about, what is the, you know, all of those things. Um, I'd hate for us to be doing things in silos when they could be cross-pollinating each other. I don't know.

Uh, I I think there was a technology committee when Seth Grant was here. Seth Grant. Seth Seth, who was who was three people before me?

Yeah. Who was that? Seth something.

Seth, it's Seth something. I can picture him. I talked to him. He wasn't as tall as you.

No. Uh um and sorry, it's not Seth Grant because it was Jim Grant after him. Anyway, it was uh I almost said Seth Green, but that's not him either.

Anyway, I think that there was a technology committee at one point when he was here, but I I don't think there has been uh one that has been active since then. Um, I'm certainly open to running one, but I also um there's a I don't know, everybody's got everybody's got a lot on their plate, so I don't want to I don't want to uh I don't want to necessarily say let's let's use that as our lens when when perhaps we're going to we for something like this, we really need something quite a bit more focused, you know, really focused on this task and not on this task, but also what devices are we buying ne next year? How are we going to plan for a Wi-Fi replacement? You know, things like that.

Yeah. No, I'm I'm thinking more sort of district technology based, less digital literacy. Yeah. Essentially.

Yeah.

So, those bodies um these these entities have bodies of standards that have progressions that are developmentally appropriate and cover digital literacy, all of all of the tech stuff. Um, and it might benefit us to think about what do we in RSU5 hope all kids will have the opportunity to learn and demonstrate mastery of when it when it comes to those areas um across the developmental continuum. So I always like it's kind of part of my work ground it in standards.

Um and so then that articulates up to the career and college ready level of expectations. Um but it leaves out no grade levels. So like this becomes then if this is something we expect where does it live in the instructional day where does it live organically in the instructional day. So that's where the real work is. We have the standards they have lessons attached like they have all the stuff we just have to figure out how do we operationalize something like that and we certainly can't do it without our educators having training on what the that is. So it's um it feels like it does start with PD and then it then we have we have a lot of guiding documents already out there u from trusted sources. We've used these sources you know for years. All of us have in in the field but to have a continuum where it's like this is how we do business. It can be guided by these standards. We don't have to create that.

I'm just hesitant about more task force on top like just t time right bandwidth.

Um I I know Sam likes to jump in and you know use all the bandwidth um plus some but you know we we have strategic planning we have early childhood. We have and and maybe there's enough people that are interested in a variety of things. I just know historically it tends to be the same people. Um, and I don't want to burn anybody out, but I do think there is some sense of urgency to be moving in a direction here. Um, because this stuff isn't stopping. So, it's just more ground to make up if we if we wait. So, that is a long- winded way of saying I I don't know.

I mean, I guess this is probably an oversimplification, which I love to do.

Uh but actually I hate to do also but um like it seems like PD is needed and we should definitely do that and that maybe task force is secondary to that. Um and so I guess I'm just saying that in in terms of like we could certainly say that we want to move forward with that if if the board needs to be involved with that. I mean I we generally aren't um you know that's that's I mean the thing is is PD is usually laid out for the year already right like all of those instructional days and those you know the staff meetings most of that stuff is already kind of laid out for the year.

So um I don't know if there's a way to work that in this year or not but I I do I do see your point Steph that like any path forward starts with getting people up to speed on where we are right now.

Right. there's there's probably things that could be done regardless of what path we took that would be beneficial to our staff. So yeah, I I'm just curious if this could be accomplished with in input from say survey data instead of a formal task force to get input from stakeholders and then you and a couple of key players do this work instead to make it to kind of streamline the process.

Since every every buck stops with you, Mr. Superintendent, I mean, I have lots of thoughts. I put myself in listening mode here. I personally think that what makes the most sense is not a task force but a committee which is comprised of mostly people who are highly motivated and interested who are on the payroll um to in an ongoing way work with Sam to make sure we are a breast of what we need to be a breast of that reports out to the board occasionally that's what I've seen work in most other places um and are they responsible for creat creating the PD or well that that part of it would usually reside the assistant superintendent um who's on the committee clearly who would certainly be part of that um you know one with my with my realistic lens on one thing that just leaps out at my mind right now is that in the current contract I don't want to say this grossly wrong and I don't have it in front of me I know that the amount of PD time has been reduced by by an amount that it really hurts So finding enough PD time to do all the things. Strategic planning is is like the one that's front and center right now. Um we're barely finding enough time to do the collaboration we need just with the amount of P PD time we have. Um so that is not to say that this is not important. I do think it's important. I actually think that I agree with Colin.

We're we don't even know what the ramifications for humanity are. Um and we need to be continually rethinking what school means in light of it.

Personally, if I were a teacher right now, and I was not I'm not that far out of the classroom, so I feel like I can still comment on this. We need to be we need to be dynamic in the way we teach so that the concerns about how AI could be misused are obiated by the way we teach.

Like we need to not teach in a way that means kids could cheat using AI. And in fact, we we need to be thinking about how we need to be teaching thinking and not things that could easily be replaced by AI. Um I could probably go on for and on for a long time about that. So I'll sorry I released the uh you well no I was sitting here being quiet. Um I will stop there. I seed my time.

Um just a a few thoughts. One is it just I I would be really curious to know what the discussions are like um either within the teachers unions or uh interacting bodies with them in terms of um because this is has again this technology has a huge impact on um on that uh collection of workers and in terms of what the expectations might be.

So I think so I think I don't know I think that would be something I'd be really curious to know about. I think committee is better than tasks force.

It's much sexier. Um so yeah let's go with committee. I think I also just want to say and I think it does I think it does connect to the to the cell phone um conversation in that I do want us to escape um as much as possible or avoid as much as possible the um uh socially culturally inherited idea that that um that we as individuals are the problem. Um because what we are having to do as a as a body, as a school and then as you know as Maria and and the other uh and our classmates and the teachers are having to do is individually respond to huge uh cultural forces that are driven by business. Um, and you know, there's a there's a a fair bit of logic to the idea that the the fast out rolling of AI is basically uh being used to just like use all of us to better train um the models so that when the bubble does crash and there are fewer um companies, the models that are remaining have used all of our um have used our training in order to uh enrich themselves. So I think that would be the other thing that I would just say is that while I have great respect uh for MIT and UNESCO, my wife went to MIT and she worked at UNESCO. Um I don't uh I'm not thrilled about just using um uh MIT's resources because the the connections between MIT and business um are uh great. Um, and so finding some bodies um that have slightly less of an economic uh interest in this matter, I think would be really helpful for us.

I I'm going to ditto your comments, Colin. Um I would love to see if this is something that we are to um I mean we need to take on, but I I would love to see what other resources are out there because I think there is a lot. And um while I'm sure MIT has a a great program and I love that it's free, I do think that there there are other resources out there that could be really beneficial to us as a district and our specific needs.

And this I do want to I think I could say a little bit more about why how a committee is different from a task force.

just that a a task force implies that you have a thing that you're going to get done and then you're going to disband and a committee is something that sits in perpetuity to continually reassess and work on the topic. I think this topic is something that's not going away and it's something that we we will continually need to adapt to.

I don't disagree with that.

I suspect that's why you were recommending um creating that committee first before the PD is maybe to have people together or can you say more about your recommendation to start there to start with what I referred to as a task force kind of generically. Um so yeah for a task force or a committee to kind of give direction to like the urgency the prioritization of the tasks potentially some of the standards that that have been reviewed any kind of provider review so like if we decide that MIT isn't a the provider we want who is and what are they aligned to um so vetting everything before we kind of put it into motion. Um, and also taking in new information because I I suspect that we are going to have um I suspect we're going to have a lot more new information in a very short period of time um that will kind of throw us in, you know, like we're going to have to respond. Um, I do suggest always that we ground our the work that we put in front of kids in standards that are researchbased and have, you know, a backing that isn't just just with a local design without that external validation. Um, and it doesn't really matter whether it's day of day of AI is free PD. That was one of the appeals for sure. But we could start with just the standards. there's enough there um to get moving uh without without any kind of like branded provider. Um but we would need some I sus I don't know about Sam but we are pretty thin at the central office administration level. I'm not sure how much how well we could execute a bunch of PD um in in group sizes that are meaningful without some support. So that does feel like maybe if we wanted to move a little bit faster, we might need to engage some external support. So something like a committee or a task force, somebody could some body could um you know help us work through the process and make decisions collectively. I think the biggest lift is actually where does this live in instruction.

The PD piece we can we can get that done. Um it's the if these are the standards now, where do they fit in the day? um are they hitched on to science or library or like where does that live?

And and different districts have fig figured that out in very different ways, but it begins at the beginning. It begins at K. Um prek tech, not so much.

But the moment we put devices in front of kids, right? We've already got Grammarly. We've already got some things running, right? So, we have to like maybe you block that. But I don't know actually it's like Um anyway, so yeah, it it yeah, we just we have to figure out and then and then there comes the you know the discussions about okay, well what what might we need to interfere with that's already in that times? There's stuff that's that's the lift.

Yep.

Someone earlier had mentioned um making use of parents who are really experts in the community and I think that's one reason why you know obviously we want to have in the committee uh teachers and board members but I would really hope that we could get some folks who might be like this is their full work is on AI and who could really bring that lens to the committee.

I don't know how we find them. You know one. Okay.

Doesn't live in this district but would come or she it's a she and she cut she would come and do PD for us but Okay.

That's just I sorry. So is the ask of is the ask is there an ask of us today and is that to question create the committee or the task force or I I think that this is the board is being informed right now. Um, I think unless the board wants to create a board committee, which you certainly have the right to do, there's convers more conversation for us to have. But I think what you're hearing is that we feel this is important. And we're we are trying at this point to think of the the best way forward given all the constraints that we contend with, time being the biggest one.

Since this is a AI conversation, I'm curious if you took the survey and fed it into AI and asked how you s how it suggests we proceed.

I didn't ask that. I did ask for uh after I read through all the responses, I did ask for like, okay, can you pick out some common themes here? because there were some people who wrote, you know, 400 words and there were some people who were like, you know, uh using four-letter words and then being like, you know, uh um so uh so it um I did use AI just to pick out like themes. That was the the primary in terms of data analysis of of that just and and that's I think pretty common with qualitative data. It's it's difficult to it's difficult. You can sit there and handcode all of it. But now that ne in my experience, this is a tremendous use for AI.

Y well just go ask it what are our you know create a create a schedule and a and a path and a plan and you know tell us where we're going.

Tell me to create a committee but you can do it. I mean, that's that's one of the great things about AI, and I think there there are many really great uses of AI.

Um, and so, yes, we joke, but I also think that it probably could give us some pretty good suggestions for PD based on based on this feedback.

Colin's laughing. I want to know what he's thinking.

Just it's just funny, y'all. The idea that we'd ask AI what should we do in terms of moving forward in an AI policy is just f it's just tech it's technically funny. I looked it up earlier on the internet and it's funny like it's like how do how do you get ID if you don't have ID you know.

Okay. So so what I'm hearing is is more to come. You will come back with what you guys think would be the most prudent next steps.

We're going to keep work Yep. We're going to keep working on this. Okay, this was great. Thank you.

Thank you. All right.

I'm not sure. Uh uh so now we are up to 9D. Alicia, is yours is exciting?

She's like, why did Jenny put me after that?

No, just talking.

Okay. Can you hear me? No. Can you hear me better now?

Better. Yeah. Okay. All right. So, um my goals for last year um when I had come in last year was my first year. I really I just asked um teachers and the leadership team that was already here what their biggest concerns were um and it was around um staff shortages and um consistency across the district. And so with the staff shortages um my goal was around building capacity. So if we're if we're unable to hire staff, we really need to build capacity within our staff that we who we currently have. Um, so that was my first goal was around building capacity um, districtwide by ensuring that all special ed staff have the essential knowledge and skills to effectively support students with special needs. Um, so with that piece um, I had established behavior skills labs at Durham Community School, Morris Street and Mass Landing. So we had one behavior program for K5 over at Durham Community School where kids from More Street or Mass Landing would access, but there wasn't consistent practices among and it was really hard at times to get students over from More Street to Darham um to participate in the programming.

So, um, together with the RBCBA, our leadership team, and the administrators at all three buildings, um, we came up with a behavior skill lab, um, a handbook or a manual with consistent practices around how students would access that program. So, at any time if kids were to shift among buildings, they would follow the same um, process with within those programs. So, we've done that and those programs are up and running in all three buildings um and is consistent with practices. The other piece of that is the schools really wanted to hang on to their own kids um which was also a reason why we established the one program across um the excuse me, three programs across the district as opposed to one district program for K5.

Um the other piece that I had done was um facilitated collaboration between staff in our BCBA to provide a lot of um informal opportunities for professional learning um and daytoday interactions.

So that would be PD like ongoing PD throughout the day provided by our BCBA when she was um in different buildings during our professional development days. our B we would have groups um based on what staff needs were um at any given time and staff had the opportunity to um attend different PD based on what they were experiencing.

Any questions on that piece?

I feel like um the BCBA last year was the first year we were actually able to fill that position.

Yeah. Um, and it sounds like it's been pretty successful having that person on. Yeah. Good.

Um, my second goal was just around consistency with special ed practices across the district. Um, so with that, um, again, having six six different buildings, it's really hard to be consistent with with how we're doing and completing our paperwork. And so I created a resource, a Google shared folder, um, and it has every template that you could think of, um, examples, different timelines, really. So it was, it's kind of a hub where all special ed staff can go to find really any answer they need with regard to special education, documentation, process, timelines. um I update it regularly with different items um anything that I get from the department or if there are resources that um are utilized by staff that they've created that are um that are great. So we we upload or I upload it to that and so staff have access um to that at all times. Um, also I'm in um I have attend bi-weekly PLC meetings, but I'm usually in each building um daily um and attend the PLC's are bi-weekly, but I'm still there um during that same time every week. So, if there are other questions that I need to answer, um so that's been good to provide that consistency. And then we have weekly leadership team meetings with our three um IEP coordinators that are spread out throughout the district, our BCBA and our school psychologists.

And so with like a weekly two to three hour meeting, we're getting all the information. We're all hearing the same thing and then that's being disseminated across the buildings um to ensure that consistency in practices. Um, I will say that so far our paperwork is is has been um aligned with the um it took a little bit to get that up and running last year, but we have we're we're really enforcing that anytime people are people are creating any sort of paperwork or documenting that they're using the templates. So, when I'm reviewing paperwork, it's all coming in and it's looking the same. Um, which is also important when you have kids in multiple buildings in one family. And so a written notice can look very different from one teacher to another teacher. And so again, making sure that that all aligns and it looks the same and it's consistent.

Um, also facilitated in-house and external professional development opportunities tailored to support um staff growth addressed to their specific needs. I spoke a little bit about that earlier with just providing opportunities um for staff to participate in um professional development provided by our BCBA um around those behavior strategies and um that can be offered during the school day through staff modeling. We've attempted to provide opportunities for after school um for edte that doesn't always work out because they're not required to stay and usually people have obligations after work. So, it's hard to to build capacity when there's not a lot of time in in the day to do that and there's not a lot of time after school to do that as well. But, um, we're we're working hard to do that. Also developed monthly professional learning committees. So, our social workers, our speech pathologists, our OT's and PTs meet monthly um as as teams to talk about what's going on around the district, what's working for them, how they're assessing different practices, um and what they would like to see moving forward on a consistent basis across the district. And this year um I added in a functional life skill PLC where our um life skills program. So middle and high school meet together and then more street and mass landing fls programs meet together as well to build that continuum of services um for students when they're accessing a K12 um life skills program.

So that those were my goals from last year. Uh any questions? Okay, so my first goal for this year, it's it's align to the first goal from last year, just really continuing to work on building capacity. Um as Linda shared earlier, um we h we're having a really hard time filling positions over at More Street, especially in our functional life skills program. Um, and it's really hard to build that capacity, um, when we have staff that we just that are brand new or we can't retain them. Um, the work is really hard and staff get burnt out. And as we all know, if you do a really good job at your job, you're asked to do more. Um, so it's it's challenging. So really making sure that we can build capacity within those programs. um our BCBA spent a significant amount of time um at Mor Street at the beginning of the school year um in the program throughout the day modeling um and and providing um like advice and and comments kind of in the moment to help support students. Um but again, that's hard when she can't be there all the time because she is a district-wide BCBA.

So really just continuing to work on building that capacity, providing ongoing specialized training sessions um to edex to really focus on supporting students with complex needs um and implementing like regular coaching systems. Um again, we've offered different times throughout the day or we're trying to find opportunities after school for staff to be able to get together. Um but again, that time it it's challenging because you can't force people um to to stay Um, so that again is just a continuation of just really working to build capacity because of the staff shortage. Um, and we can't bank on being able to hire. Um, I've been interviewing all year um, for these positions and either people withdraw their application um, or they're offered the position and they decline because they found something else. So, it's been um, a lot of interviews with with that are not amounting to to anything which is challenging.

And my second goal is around our early childhood special education. Um so bringing on that cohort three next year.

Um that involves a lot of um working with the task force meetings, deciding on program models, determining staffing needs. um you know posting jobs, onboarding people, looking at different policies, procedures, classroom preparation, trainings for staff if needed, child fine, so notification of child fine to parents to make sure that they are aware that we are um going to be assessing and responsible for their all four-year-olds within the district.

Um family engagement and just making sure that once we are able to move forward that we are ready to hit the ground running um at the beginning of next school year. Any questions?

Uh, thank you. Um, and even if, um, I'm just thinking about, uh, goal two kind of first here. Even if the board decided not to move forward with cohort 3, this is still work that needs to be done because we do have to do this at some point. So maybe it's not to be hit the ground running for July one. Yeah.

Um just just thinking, you know, in in terms of sequential process here, but um and then um and just to to add to that, we would or I would 100% we'd have to be figuring how we're going to make this work.

Yeah. This isn't this isn't if it's when. Yeah. 100%.

Yeah. Um and then on goal one and sort of going back to um the the public comment we had earlier in the in the session tonight. Um is is our um struggle to hire an RSU5 issue? Is it is it everybody's facing I'm just curious.

It's it's a nationwide struggle and when I talk to colleagues of you know districts all over the state, not just surrounding districts, they're all facing these same challenges. It's it's not just an RSU5 issue.

And when it's hard work, it's really hard work.

Um and there there's a high burnout rate. And um I think we we're seeing it more of an influx of students with with higher needs who are really struggling that have no skills when they're coming into kindergarten um than we've seen before.

And um you mentioned interviewing um which is great that we're even getting applicants and then you know that they're not accepting because they found something else. Did they find something else outside of education or they finding a similar position elsewhere? Do we know similar positions elsewhere? Um or at times they're they're just not informing. You know, they may not show up for an interview or say I'm withdrawing but they don't give a reason. Um, typically if they're withdrawing an application, they do say, you know, I found a position in a in another district, a nearby district. Yeah. I sorry, all the hands went up.

Didn't mean to interrupt, that I think it's fair to say, and we should correct me if I'm wrong. I think that the the work in the life skills programs for early childhood have particular stressors and challenges that they're really hard Yeah. I mean, when you think about some of these students who would really have benefited from full day programming before preK, they didn't have the services from CDS because there aren't providers, right?

So, these kiddos who would have benefited from OT, PT, speech, and full-on like specially designed instruction have received nothing. Um, so when we're getting them, they have no skills. they don't know how to be in school. They may have been at home um with with a caregiver, you know, this whole time who can understand what it what what their child needs, right? But if they're non-verbal and they're grunting, we don't know any of those pieces. So, it takes time. There's a lot of um I don't want to say a lot of physical aggression, but there is there is a lot of physical aggression, but it's around students not being able to get their needs met and being able to communicate, right? So staff are getting bit. Their their hair is getting pulled.

It's a really tough job. Um I would say probably one of the most challenging jobs in special education is being um in a special program. Um and ideally they would be fully staffed with staff that have a high skill set um and a capacity to learn how to do those jobs. The unfortunate piece is we don't have a lot of applicants and the pool the pool is really it's shallow and so there and I don't believe in filling a having a body you know just to fill a position but there are times that we really just need bodies um and when I'm interviewing I'm really clear with people that this is challenging and this is kind of what it looks like on a day-to-day basis so that they are aware of what they're getting into um and sometimes people come and then they you know they resign pretty quickly because it's it's hard. Yeah.

Kelly, I am curious if when you find an applicant has resigned to go to another district if there is a pay factor involved if if they've ever given you that feedback.

Um I know the districts that they're that you know that are surrounding that they are going to. So there probably is a a small increase in pay.

care.

Yeah, I was gonna ask a similar question and and if there are any districts that are keeping are filling the positions and are keeping them. I know it sounds like it is a nationwide problem, but are there any that are like managing to figure this out? And what are the what are the keys? And if you're not sure, maybe you can ask chat GPT.

Sure. Yeah. No. Um I haven't asked specifically to colleagues or this hasn't come up like are you completely fully staffed and what are you doing?

Usually the conversations are oh yeah we're in we're in the same boat. Um so but I but I can at my next one of my next directors meeting I can certainly put it out there to Cumberland County admin to say like hey is is anyone fully staffed with with edex and how how are you doing that? They're probably not going to tell you.

Yeah, cuz they don't want you to do the same thing.

I I don't know of another district that is fully staffed with edteex right now. Um there are there are districts that have different sort of pay structures that try to address this problem.

Yeah. And I and I will say um we are really fortunate that we're fully staffed with our teachers with special education teachers because there are a lot of districts that are not staffed with teachers and edte and you have um kids going without services or the special ed director or assistant special ed director teaching classes um to students. So we are we're really fortunate in that way. Um but it's really unfortunate that we can't fill these positions. And I would say it's consistently been, you know, six to seven positions just since I've been here. And this is only my second year across all the schools. So that's not all at More Street.

Not all at Mor Street. Most most of them are. We have three open positions currently at More Street. And we will have um more.

Yeah.

Steph, I have two questions. One is um approximately how many people have you interviewed that have fallen like that have not resulted in a hire? I would say probably at least 10 to 12 people this this school year. So from September until now um that haven't panned out and and it's a process. So it's really time consuming to go you know to set up the interview to have hold the interview um really time consuming to get references. Um sometimes it can take over a week to get back in touch with references. Um, and then you go through all of that work and then you call the person, they don't return your call. Usually I try three times and after three times it's like, okay, um, it's probably not going to work out. But it can be a two to three week process um, for hiring an edtech and then it doesn't really pan out to anything which is unfortunate. Yeah.

Yeah. and that any an estimation of how many folks um start and then resign quickly thereafter.

Well, I haven't been able to hire any ed techs this year. Okay. So, yeah, never mind. Yeah.

Yeah. And then this this might be a question for uh Erica or Tom because it's about the early childhood task force, but is there like a standard um budgetary rate that would be allowed under the funding that we would get through um cohort 3?

Not not in terms of um what we would be paying staff because that varies contract to contract by district. that they would be looking at what we're asking for and determining if they felt it was reasonable given our numbers and our needs.

On the flip side of our staffing crisis, um what unmet need do we have that we're not currently covering, if anything, um for our students? Are there students that are maybe suffering seems trit? um maybe not getting the education we would like them to have because of our staffing issue.

So right now all of our students are receiving the services that are within their IEP. Um mostly um sometimes there's a unique situation and we do our best to fill that position. Um but it's it's rare. Um, and what we will do is in the event we can't provide a service, we do keep track of that time owed and then do a compensatory service. So, when we're able to hire somebody, um, we might add on additional service time to make up what was missed or a student that typically may not qualify for extended school year, they could receive those makeup service times like over the course of the summer or over vacations if you have people. Um, fortunately we we don't have that situation um, currently. Um, what I will say, so staff students aren't per se missing out on service times, but it's really hard when we have a lot of students that have edte support as needed um, in their IEPs and we have a shortage of edte. So edte are doing their best to to float and manage and check in with multiple kids across different settings. Um, but it is it is hard to to do that because you could have one edtech floating between three classrooms looking at three different students and you could have two students that really need that support. And so it's like picking which kiddo needs it um or right now.

Um, so obviously there's a financial reason that these people that you've interviewed or or um gotten applications for have not kind of come to fruition, but do you see any other thing that we could we could do that would be beyond or in addition to that financial difference? Like do we have some is there some competitive advantage that we're missing?

I don't think so. I I just think it's it's really hard to be in education right now.

I I think Chris, you know, we can do our best to provide the best work environment possible and the pay is part of that. Um, to return to a theme that we've touched on, it is the work with the little kids who have very high needs that is actually across the spectrum the most dangerous.

It's the most likely where you're going to get hurt. um it's where you're going to be toileting where you can't turn your back for a minute and the edte are the people who are doing that and so it's very very hard work and it is very highkilled work and the availability of individuals who are willing to take that on and have the skill set and the qualifications um and there are qualifications to being an edtech um it it's scarce And if you are a a special ed tech and that is your career, like you could see why people might move move up the age span to to sort of get away from the the very young if that is the most challenging. I mean over time there's only so much um I will say we we do have really great ed techs in this district. Yeah.

Um and we can pull from general ed. So oftent times when there are gaps in special ed with edteex, we can pull from our general ed edte to help support in that setting. Um so people are are really stepping up and doing a great job. It's just it it's hard when there are so many unfilled positions that are that are high needs um with with high need students. But I I don't want anyone to think that our you know the current ed techs that we have aren't working hard because they're all working their butts off every day.

Clearly. Yeah. Yeah. I don't think this is uh you know, similar to to Sam saying it's it's not for lack of of working really hard and using every moment available to them. It's just there's only so much one person can do.

Yeah. Y any other comments, questions? Thank you. You're welcome.

All right. So, uh moving on to item 10, board comments committee reports. uh board information exchange agenda requests.

I just want to thank the students who spoke earlier. Um really really inspiring and and wonderful to see the level of voice that's being encouraged in the high school and also the um the general activism. It's really nice to see and I hope that you continue to um to pursue that and with other topics and maybe even like at the state level and and things like that. It's really exciting. So, thank you.

Yeah. And in addition to folks that came and spoke today, we also received letters from from several students as well. So, um and you know, from from each of whether it was public comment or a letter we got, you know, things jumped out to me like, "Oh, that's a really good point. we need to make sure that we address those things when we're talking about whether it's implementation or whether it's um you know how we proceed or or what the policy looks like. Um, so all um all very um productive I felt like um you know to Superintendent Gray's point earlier, it's it's hard um you know when there's differing perspectives. Um but I really appreciated the um the authenticity and and the passion that they portrayed, but also in a very um very respectful way.

So kudos to you guys and kudos to you two for hanging in there. Yeah.

All right. Yeah.

Um, yes. Just for the record, the uh individual that I poached that term from uh moral uh the budget as a moral document is uh Representative Melanie Saxs uh of Freeport. So, that is who I uh I stole it I stole it from. And I actually heard it from a she's gonna she's going to text me and tell me that was mine. Um I actually heard that same commentary from a um a US uh congressperson as well in the last couple of weeks. So it's catching.

Um okay, any other information requests? Um I will share that we had the leadership um meeting last week. Um and I want to say it's probably the first one since maybe the very first one where we had everyone who uh uh in attendance. We had um Tom, myself, and Kelly were there from from the RSU. We had um three uh members of the select boards and the councils, two chairs and one uh the panel um representative because John wasn't able to join. Uh and then we had the town um managers for all and or administrators from all three towns. And I thought it was a really good conversation. Um we talked a lot about budget. Um obviously um we talked a lot about communication um how we can be more sort of collaborative and supportive of you know making sure um you know they're telling you know we different people watch different things or or key into different information in in their communities. So trying to be as transparent as possible. So, you know, when the council is saying, "Hey, you know, the school budget is is, you know, in full swing and and vice versa and um helping people understand their their place in the process and where they can be involved and um you know, there was some good information exchanging on like, oh, you know, how do you communicate with your with your communities versus how other towns do um I thought it was really I thought it was really productive. It was it was really good conversation.

Yeah. So, um And you know what they really liked last year was you ended up Yeah.

changing the way that the budget brochure went out because the process took longer than it was supposed to. And so, but guess what? They actually liked the little one pager with the QR code.

Um, and there was feedback like you may just want to do it that way. So, not that we want to hash that out right now, but just that was an idea that was unexpected that came. Do they say why they felt that it was efficient?

Probably saves money in postage.

Probably it's just easier all the way around. And then having paper copies available at the strategic locations where they were, they just felt it met the need.

Do they have room in their in their newsletter columns for RC5 information?

I think they do different things. Um they don't all do the same sort of dissemination of information. Um, I know historically like Durham does a weekly newsletter that they're that they send out, but it's sort of like a running column that stuff just stays on there until it I don't know, someone takes it off eventually. Like usually, I think when we're going to have like the budget meeting or the referendum, we'll make sure they put something on there, but not anything more um frequent than that typically. And I'm not sure um I'm not sure what panel and and free ports look like in terms of what they push out for information. Um I mean everybody seemed very open to you know trying to cross-pollinate and share information. though if we can certainly ask that actually came up in a conversation I had with a um a friend and neighbor who is saying that she really wishes that there'd be more information in the town newsletter about what's happening in the school district and just in general wanting more opportunities to learn about what's happening in the district. Yeah, it's um you know, one thing that they had said was they try to be careful not to like push school stuff through the town resources.

Um although it sounded like that is it sound like there was a point in time where that was kind of the direction from the council to try and keep things more separate, but their sense was that might be shifting the other way a little bit more. So, um, you know, the idea around like, hey, here's the town budget, here's the school budget. So, less sort of compartmentalized and more holistic. Um, so, you know, that that might be an opportunity.

Um, all right. Policy.

Um, hi. So the policy committee, we met on Wednesday, December 3rd uh for an hour and a half on Google Meet. Um we were uh joined by um Glenn Reynolds and uh Pam Crosby and Jen Gulo who were asked to come to uh share some of their expertise and insights on some of the um policies. Um we were we looked at as part of our regular um uh law change review, we just took a look again at the EBCF, the automated external defibrillators, just to affirm that uh we had heard that the board was uh supportive of moving that one forward.

Um and then we also then talked about um EBBD which we've brought before you tonight for first read which is temperature standards for schools um which Glenn uh provided a lot of really um important and helpful detail on and he can also uh speak to some of the that tonight. Um and we also um talked for the second time about uh JICJ cell phones and other personal electronic devices in schools. Um and had a good conversation about that that was informed um by um uh Principal Crosby and Principal Golgo um uh passing on some of some thinking that had emerged through um through their circles. Um, and uh I think I'll just I think I'll just say that I think we could have um we could have sat on the um uh JICJ longer as a committee um because there was plenty more that we could talk about. Um but we thought that it was in the best interest of um uh the district to bring it forward to for to the board um so that we could have a full conversation um about it um and then uh at your direction um if need be go back and do more work. Um we uh table JICK bullying and JICKR bullying administrative procedures. Um as well as uh we we took a brief look at G uh GBCC employee use of cell phones. Um though that was primarily as uh meant as reference. Um so we had an understanding of what the uh uh policy is for staff use um as we consider um the student use period.

All right. You want to just jump right into the policies? Uh, do you want to do a motion? What? You want the lights back on?

Thank you, Charlie.

Can I make a comment about the lights? No.

So with regard to EBCF defibrillators which is being brought forward for second read when we got to this in the policy committee we we remembered sort of all of us in the room like okay they asked us to go back and look at something on here but we were all like what what was it and it had something to do with the first paragraph and Michelle has conveniently reminded me that the the ask was and none of us remembered The word should should be become will.

So in other u we will have at least one ed.

Cara cara left. She was so embarrassed that we missed that. So I I just submit that now if we want to consider it for second read and I will make sure and Jenny's probably watching so she'll remind you too that it would if you were to approve it and you wanted to do that consistently with what you discussed last time it would be with that one word revision.

Great. Nice catch.

All right. So uh let's get a motion on the floor for the for the first reads.

So, do I have a motion for consideration and approval for the first read of the following policies? EBBD, temperature standards for schools, new policy, and JICJ, cell phones and other personal electronic devices in schools, new policy, Kelly and Anna. Thank you.

Great. Um, so we bring these two uh new policies forward tonight. Um, let's talk first about EBBD, temperature standards for schools. Um this is uh just quite simply this is a uh new uh standard that is required uh by the state that we have a policy. Um so we made one. Um, and what this does is lays out um a framework for um uh sort of uh procedures, but primarily um having to do with establishing um uh temperature ranges and benchmarks um uh to ensure um safe and healthy um uh working environments for our students and staff.

Um Glenn, would you like to come up and just share a little bit of your um because because all of the the truly substantive um information here um uh Glenn was able to provide coming from from some of the um engineering um standards and um and sort of other sort of contextual information from uh federal and state uh work that was done. So Glenn, could you share a little bit?

Yeah, absolutely. Um, so it it's basically it's like like you indicated, it gives us the framework to be able to react to uh situations inside uh whatever the building may be. Um the ranges are um the reason why we have a range is uh you could have a different issue at Mass Landing School versus an issue over at Durham School. Over at Durham, it could be mid 80s with high humidity in the 90s and then over at Mass Landing School where it's a little bit closer to the ocean be a little different. So, um you want to want to have a range. One of the questions was, you know, why wouldn't we just have a set point and that's why we would need the range. Um actually, uh Superintendent uh Gray did a lot of work on the uh what the meanings of the uh ASHe55 was for. Um, so I I'll leave that up to him if he wants to share that. If I don't have the notes in front of me and I don't nor do I.

I believe they're called Ashray standards. I'm not a I'm not an engineer, but I believe that's what Oh, you mean the American Society of Heating, Refrigeration, and Air Conditioning Engineer Standards. Look at that.

But those in the no call it ashray. Oh, I see.

Yeah. So, this is just helpful for us to be able to uh react to a situation in a building what we were already doing anyways. So if if you pick um another school and and it's hot, we'll bring fans during the you know school year or what have you or if there's a ventilation problem, we'll address it or what have you. This just gives us a frame framework to be able to move forward with that.

Yeah. And I think I will also just say that um that uh again these these ranges are are relatively stardized. We had a reference for example can't remember whether it was superintendent gray or um Glenn brought that for example New York State has a requirement that um that there is action taken at 82 degrees Fahrenheit and then relocation of students at 88 degrees Fahrenheit. Um Maine does not have a state does not have a state standard in that same way.

Um, but also just to say that this was also run uh run by staff and and I think uh principal Crosby weighed in as just to sort of say like practically in terms of just from a building administration uh standpoint um this uh seemed functionally um to do what it needs to do which again at the end of the day is really what we care about. Um is this giving our um administrators and staff uh the tools they need to to serve our students? Uh yes, Valerie. So I have sort of a broader question, then I have a really hyper specific question. Um I know that on two different occasions while visiting the middle school specifically, I um was in classrooms where they had opened windows because it was unbearably hot during the heating season.

Is this something that's addressed in this policy specifically that I missed or something that would fall under this policy?

Absolutely. Okay.

Yeah. would so under the heating season with the range would be anywhere from 62 to 72. Uh so in that situation 68 to 72 excuse me 68 to 72. Thank you.

Some people think 62 is a little that's what I keep my house at.

But um so the reason why that is uh we're in the process of replacing the uh failed energy management system. So right now toward the end of last year the system just kind of went rogue. The system died. So we're in this process of changing that new one. It's not fully up and running yet. Once that's up and running, we'll be able to control the system. But the reason why the windows were open was because of that.

Perfect. Thank you so much. Um, my hyper specific one is maintained at loser should be lower maybe hopefully where no we Kelly and I already had a discussion about this. We mean we mean loser.

We mean loser loser is the where is that again? It's just it's not it's not it's not us.

It's what the Ashrays uh told us. Super big Beck fans. They want Thank you. Well done. Okay.

Yeah, we should change that word. Lose.

[Music] Um any other any other any other question? This is the first read thankfully. Any other questions uh about this?

Either the the letter of it or the spirit of it um that we could answer or that I could ask glimp. Um, so, uh, nothing there's no there's no hard stop here that says if it gets to this up or down, kids have to go. We don't have that in Maine. This is just the standard like this is what we're shooting for.

This is the expectation. We're going to mediate as we need to to to do our best to live within those things. But there's nothing that says here like, hey, when our system is going down and we're working to replace it, that we can't send kids there in the meantime as long as it's safe. Yes.

Yes. And again, my my my sense is that this uh in my mind rightly keeps that decision in the superintendent's office.

Uh so that um but again that range is to sort of it's like once once it gets if it's 82 then we know that the um the building administrators are communicating with Glenn and communicating uh with Tom about that and that then a decision can be made but no there's not a hard and fast rule.

Okay, great. Thank you. All right, next one.

Kelly, were there other things because I for my computer got left at work on this one? It was the that was the only one. Yeah. Okay, cool. Thanks. Um, great. So, we will go back and change loser to lower or will it be? Uh, and then we'll bring it back to you for a second read. Glenn, thank you so much um for all your help.

Um, all right, let's move on to um JICJ um which is a new policy cell phones and other personal electronic devices in schools. Um so this was um we were working uh working from a a template that um superintendent Gray um provided that gave us uh sort of a array of options for sort of thinking about what the these policies must look like. Again we are um again also to make very clear the impetus for creating this policy is not the identification of a problem um in the schools. it is that this is required that we have this in place uh by July 1. Um that we have a policy regardless of what um we decide that policy uh says we have to have that policy. So that's why we put it on our agenda um and rightly then discussing all of the things that come with it. Um I'm not sure Tom how we might go about this. I mean, we can go through some sort of the the the sort of higher level um pieces, but I'm mostly curious to see what um what other board members identified as areas that they um had questions about, things that seemed like were in going in the right direction, places where we're going in the wrong direction. I think one thing I did want to just flag um is that I we have made the decision um again I think in the general spirit of our other uh policies and procedures to not have the uh policy itself um dictate any of the techniques that might be used um for uh enforcement of the policy. Um so for example we the we did not feel it was appropriate um to include in here a statement that uh that for example that it is required that we use yonder bags or equivalent right that is that we leave that decision um uh to the the superintendent and the administrators. So just to just to be very clear that like that is a that's a decision like that's a decision and we could uh make a different decision. I think I will just say that that I think um I I want to echo what Cara said to to our stu to the students who came tonight that it was just extremely it was extremely heartening at at many levels um the level of engagement there and and the and the um the quality of the the critical quality of the critical thinking on on that was really just um wonderful. So again um kudos to them. I will say that um as someone who I think was um more in support of the sort of the y the yonder bag um usage, I think that um especially having heard the student arguments tonight, I think that I would just sort of put into the mix, even though that's not part of this discussion at present, I would just say that I think that um that I think uh my personal opin opinion would be that we should move um forward and encourage the administration to be not using um yonderbacks to be um exploring um the this this policy of Elabel ban um but recommending um that we not pursue that again I'm not saying that on as the committee chair I'm not saying that um on behalf of the board I'm just saying that as an individual um and again I want to thank the um students for the uh quality of that argument So, questions, thoughts, curiosities, other things that we've spelled wrong like Beck songs. U, could I point out a few highlights?

Yes, please.

Just like I'm going I'm starting at the top. Um, it's a good place to start. Major um highlight of the introduction, if you dig into it, is that it establishes an aspiration that we will have education about responsible cell phone use. that'll be taught somewhere.

Um, second, under guidelines for phone free school day, that actually is a change in language from the sample. It originally said something about a ban and this was deemed to be more positive language.

Third, just under that, importantly, the following provisions apply to all students preK through grade 12 effective July 1st, 2026.

So, not to go into effect until next school year to give us time to roll this out thoughtfully.

Um, if you look through the bullets that are below, it does allow cell phones to be used on the bus to and from school.

Um, if you look at the last bullet, it basically says if a student has a health related need that's in a 504 or an IEP, for example, a diabetic student who needs their phone to monitor their blood sugar, that is allowed. Um, if you go further down, I'm under mi the potential consequences, misuse of cell phones and other electronic devices.

As Colin said, the the discussion in the policy committee was the schools should implement the procedures about how to respond to the misuse. So this policy does not say if a student does this this will happen. It does say here are things that could happen a verbal warning confiscation etc. But it specifically says and I'm looking at the third paragraph. RSU number five schools may develop administrative procedures to implement and enforce this policy appropriately.

Um, part of the wisdom behind that is that we have no idea what the next new device will be and how it would need to be enforced or when it would come out and we don't want to have to go back to the policy committee every time Mark Zuckerberg thinks of a new device whether it's glasses or visors or whatever the heck. So, it may be just wisest for that to reside in the land of procedure.

Um, if you look beyond the bullets, I'm on the second page.

The first line says, "At all grade levels, parent student communication should be channeled through the school office or by email." That is in response to the um concern that parents want to be able to communicate with their kids throughout the day. And this is direction about how that should be handled. back like when I was in high school. You had email in high school.

I did not have email in high school. I did have it in college, but I was like, "Wow, this is cool." Um, maybe it would prompt them to check their email more.

And I believe probably not.

I believe those are the like for me those are the main highlights.

Something really quick that we talked about.

Yes, please. Um so on the implementation for July 1st 2026, we had mentioned that we wanted the education to be implemented in the spring of 25 because our idea was that the education implemented in the spring then set us set us up for a more successful launch in 26.

Yeah. And I think thank you Tom for for walking us through that. And I think also just to to to linger on the the date, I think um I think our uh original inclination was sort of um was sort of like whenever we get this passed, right?

Like whenever we sort of uh move forward with first read, move forward with second read, once it gets passed a certain point after that, um it would then be implemented. Um I think we recognize that that is not a terribly efficient approach. Um and also we did hear um from um Principal Gulo that in conversations at the high school um both with uh staff and with students um there was definitely a feeling that sort of implementing um this for example in mid-Marchch um would have a much more disruptive um impact than would benefit would have any sort of benefit. Um, so I think that we identified that again we're required to have this in place by July 1st. So that is where that is coming from. Um, I don't think um, yeah, I'll just I'll just pause there.

Yeah, I'm interested to hear folks um, thoughts on that because you know what I had took from a lot of our conversation was the goal to get this in sooner than later. Um, I I am fully supportive of the the why and the discussion and the and the conversation and education piece happening before it it comes into play.

So, I I am I'm great with what you guys have proposed here, but it seems different than what it felt like the board's general consensus was previously. So, I'm interested to hear what Yeah. And I think and yeah, I think I'll I'll I'll own that. And I think that again I think the two pieces of it, one was the the pragmatism of it, I think we were looking at this and saying like let's say we brought this forward and and this was uh pitch perfect. Um then when is it uh January 14 um that would be the first that would be the first date we could we could technically make it make it policy. Um and so we have we have missed the the window that was discussed earlier. The idea that um we have all our ducks in a row uh so that when we go on winter break um the students and staff would be prepared and leaving with an understanding that when we come back that the the that there was a sort of clean um break that coming back from winter break that that's when the moment would be and we just recognized that that wasn't possible. Um and I think we also did very much take into consideration the um the on the ground um ad advice from uh perspective of the um administrators. Cara and Chris is that fair assessment of what we doing?

I think so. Um one of the big feedback from principal Golo was that it was going to be really difficult to implement it successfully in in that time frame because not only is it just implementation, but it's also staff education and and all that that comes before I I have I'm changing the subject. So if anybody else has thoughts on that one, sorry.

Oh, that they still need to develop their own how they're going about this, too. So even once the policy is passed, they still need some time to do that. I I mean I'll admit that I was anxious to get this underway, but I it does seem to make sense and I want to support their feedback.

Yeah. And I think I think also as part of the conversation there was a little bit of a sense that if we let's say we as a board moved quite quickly on this um we're forcing um we're really like kind of unfunded mandate um forcing our forcing our our staff to like it's like okay like jump. Um and again we just felt that that was uh inappropriate and counterproductive. Um so yeah so I think like I think um I will own on our behalf that we have shifted that um so that would that is a decision um that we can that y'all should direct us on. Um but that this is our recommendation.

Okay. um a couple of bigger picture issues and then some little nitty-gritty stuff. But I just thought it was a little interesting that we decided to tell what they couldn't do with their phones when we're not letting them have their phones. I had that question mark, too.

So, I just wanted kind of people's thoughts on why we're telling them that they can't use their phones in ways that will bully or in the bathrooms or lockers when they're not supposed to have them at all.

Is it outside of school hours? Maybe like if you were here for a basketball game at night or something, you still wouldn't use your phone in the bathroom.

Or is that like the extra bad way to use your phone?

Or is it okay to use your phone in the bathroom at night? Uh, yes.

Not that this is where the conversation went because it didn't, but I actually believe so that's this is this is an adaptation of a sample policy that we got from the Woodson. Um, and I would say that this is what it says above is that is during the school day and that below it is in addition to the school day. Like even if it's after the game at 8:00, you are not to use your phone in the locker room.

Okay, maybe we could be clear about that. Yeah, I mean I guess I guess I would clarific say that again we didn't discuss this in in particular to your to your question, Kelly, but I guess the way I think about it is that um is that it's slightly more um meant as uh sort of just in information and framing um to say because this because uh misuse and then within that is the violations. If we were to if we were to take out the first two paragraphs under misuse violations would would simply would simply mean using a phone and I think yes on the one hand that is very like clear and that's very clear. Um on the other hand I think this gives um again my sense is that it would give the the staff um just really like sort of like things to point at um is sort of the way I I think I kind of internalized it. Um, but again, I'm not wed to it.

The other part of it that is worth paying attention to is the last sentence, which is that student cell phones and other electronic devices may be subject to search if there's reasonable suspicion of a violation. And that that is the law. There's a legal reference to that that's included on the back page. Um, and that is worth people knowing. Yep.

that the administration does have the right to search a student's phone if there is a reasonable suspicion of a crime being a violation or the SRO has the right to do that if they suspect a crime and they they actually have a higher threshold of evidence that they would need to meet to be able to do that.

Okay. Yeah. the mis the misuse section for me.

Um I guess I think it might be clearer if we state like when those things apply. I mean because you're you're also not allowed to bully someone outside of school on your phone, right? I mean so it's not just in school, it's also outside of school um or harass or any of those things.

I mean some of these are illegal, right? And they're also addressed in other policies, right? Um, so would you say Michelle if we were to preface that paragraph with words saying at all times, including outside of school hours, outside of the school day?

Yeah, I would I would say that whatever we refer to as the school day or however we frame that earlier, I think makes sense to put it there. Um, so that's like like bus on the way to and from school for instance.

Yeah. So, right when you can when it is allowed to have your phone. Yeah.

And just you know the title is cell phones and other personal electronic devices in schools. So we might want to reconsider, right? Or maybe there is a during the school day and a not in the school day piece because, you know, I I keep thinking back to, you know, a game or something after school where they could have their phones because it's not during the school day, but we also don't want them taking pictures in the bathroom. Um, do we capture that rule somewhere in another policy right now? Which rule?

The no phones video recording in locker rooms. I'm not sure.

Is there like a privacy one? Yeah, I'm not sure off the top of my head. I don't know. It's in the handbook.

It's in the student handbook. Okay.

I feel like I feel like it is because I think we we we had some conversation a couple years ago about like deep fake um like deep fake photos of students and there was something about that that had to do with images and use of images or creation of images and there was something but I'll I'm going to make a note cyber bullying certainly mentioned in bullying we had talked about it but I don't know that we ever actually addressed it in policy I think we just talked about is it something I remember what we did was we didn't change anything because it was already there. It was already covered.

It wasn't We didn't need to add anything about deep fake because it was already umbrellaed. I think you're right. Yeah.

Uh but I'm going to look I'm going to make a note to look for that.

I wonder too like there maybe there needs to be another subheading that would kind of organize more of the thoughts on the second page because a lot of them are about communication.

Yeah. Yeah, school. It just kind of feels like they just keep following, but there's not really under the I felt like some of that stuff would actually be fit pretty well in the first section under guidelines because the guidelines here, they talk a lot about what can't be done, but we could include the things that are allowed under guidelines, too.

And I guess to keep talking, um, the personal electronic devices, I heard some students that were concerned that AirPods might be included in personal electronic devices. And I'm not really sure if that's clear in this policy whether or not they would be.

I think the intention is they would because you can call and text and do anything on your phone that you can do on your AirPods. So, or it could be connect it could be Bluetooth to your phone which is in your bag outside.

So, um to the um uh Mrs. Luchcci who came and spoke about um specifically around the AirPods discussion piece. Um, I'm wondering if um the exception for it doesn't specifically say a 504, does it? Should should it say? I've Is that what a IHP is? Is the same as a 504 plan?

It It's not, but it could be. That could be a 504 plan.

Okay. Is it more broad and more inclusive having that IHP as opposed to a 504? Yes.

Okay. I mean, is it possible that someone could have a 504 that allows them to use their headphones? Absolutely. Yeah. Right.

It's possible that someone could have a 504 that says that they can listen to like background noise or something like that.

Um, it would never say that they would have access to their own headphones. It would say, you know, they could have access to background music while they study. Um, that could be supplied through a district-owned device and, you know, in all in all ways.

Okay.

So, I guess that raises another question is I didn't see where in that paragraph IEPs or 504s would specifically allow the use of these devices. Would that need is that language that it's really the the individual health plan, right? But it seems like it's really more addressing health issues versus maybe learning needs, right? An accommodation.

Yes, an accommodations.

Yeah, we had that in there in a previous draft and I don't recall why we took it out.

I don't remember that. I thought I remember we took it out because we wanted to make it a little bit more vague and not have it specific that because there was there was some needs that might be outside of an IEP that would be appropriate usage. I thought that's what we had discussed.

That's what I was wondering if the I if the IHP is more broad and allows for more ability to work within that system as opposed I mean because I know a 504 or an IEP is a very specific plan whereas this if this is more broad to allow for more discretion on the administrator's the other part that we had discussed on that was talking specifically about a health care worker's orders right it because it says um healthcare provers order as incorporated into the student's individual health plan and I We had talked about that versus having it be more admin controlled because we had in our discussion at least we had we had mentioned that like it would be very simple for a you know a parent to come in and say like oh my my kid needs to have access to their phone. What I do remember us saying is we would not want to have an IEP say my child can use their phone.

Um because there is always a way to meet those needs that doesn't involve the child's phone. We can supply a district device that is monitored that has you know the things in it. But specifically there are health reasons for that such as diabetic control and things like that which is why we we put in the healthcare provider but that would be something that would be controlled by the administrator or the you know right the parent doesn't get to write the ID they don't but I I I will say this about that it it is it could be it can be very make those conversations is very difficult and put that administrator in the role of a gatekeeper. Um, sometimes in the face of a very heated conversation, which is not necessarily the best use of their energy, which is why you're you're putting it back to health.

Yeah. To health, which I think is what the science teacher was saying earlier is like she didn't want it to give rise to more requests to have accommodations, all these accommodations. So I I really like that and like what Tom was saying that if there is oh my child needs background music to study then they don't need a cell phone they can use a school own the iPad. Yeah. Yeah.

Yeah. And this was with guidance from principal Gulo as well. And I'm wondering if Prince Asant principal Melon has any thing he wants to add. You don't have to but it look like you might have something you want to say.

I'm here. Glad I'm here. it's uh relevant for sure. Um yeah, so thank you. Hello everybody. Uh so yeah, I mean in terms of this the discussion where it stands right now about accommodations and and 504s and IEPs, I've never seen a 504 and IP that says a student can have a fi, you know, a cell phone uh for an accommodation. Uh I have seen, like uh Tom said, we definitely have accommodations where kids need background noise and things like that and we supply headphones. we they can use their computers for that that their their MacBooks for that. Um and so but we have seen we do have students with diabetes that definitely need their phones to monitor their glucose. So, I mean, the the individual health plan uh definitely seems to make more sense than than talking about IEPs and 504s because it is it is and I could see with this with this um creating this, you know, cell phone free schools policy, uh I could see that being leveraged for kids to start asking for that in 504s and IEPs and that that could be a slippery slope for sure.

Yeah. Yeah. And I I guess I would just say on that again I mean I think these these are things I mean I was going to say that if Felicia was still here this would be something to run by her just in terms of that like that this piece but I think that particularly as we've talked about before with an understanding that um mental health and um uh and addiction are part of this conversation. I think sort of I think um I think we have to be thinking about how um to again because as we as we have continually uh talked about this there is there is nothing in this that is meant to be punitive. This is about student health and about uh education.

And so just thinking about how do we make sure that we're not creating a situation where um there becomes like a channel where uh students uh who do um have a um addiction to their phone are able to use uh their their families are able to use that as a way to um continue access when actually uh the addiction itself is actually what needs to be addressed.

I hear everything that's being said about the accommodations for the 504s and IEPs, but I just wonder if by leaving that piece out if there might be something down the road, you know, something that we haven't even thought of yet that we're prohibiting as an accommodation because we're leaving that piece out. Just a thought. I mean, I guess yeah, we certainly we certainly don't want to do that, but we are we are obligated by law to cover someone's 504 and IEP.

Yes. Yes.

So, if it is written in there, we have to even if we have a policy that says you can't, right? So, you know, if it were truly required by the the the team creating that IEP, I think that's how you could get around having that concern.

It would it would trump our policies, right?

Right. Like we are obligated to deliver on the IEP as written.

Yeah. Yeah, I mean I think that is an important thing to for us always to remember is that um uh state law and federal law trump uh our policies um and any any uh moment when we decide to do if we ever were to decide to do something that was uh deliberately out of alignment with state or federal law, we just know we're picking a legal fight. Um, so I think this doesn't I think I think it's a really I think it's a really really good point. And again, I'm I'm agnostic on on the inclusion of that or not, but I think I understand the rationale for not getting uh more granular, but again, it's the board's uh discretion. Valerie, I'm going to take a little bit of a left turn. Um, in the first paragraph, it ends with or without internet or cellular network connectivity capabilities. And I'm wondering if this is too broad.

I'm thinking of I mean I think a big part of student life these days is taking photos of your friends and we're taking away their camera or their primary camera. Would a digital camera fall under this? It doesn't have internet capabilities. It is a electronic device. Um things like a a dumb pedometer instead of a smart pedometer that it's a dumb pedometer.

My kid has a Garmin Vivo. It does nothing but steps and I think that's it.

It's but it's an it's a personal electronic device. You can't contact anybody on it, but it's still an electronic device. So, I think there's some things that fall under Yeah, I think that's a really good point because I think also like a a Kindle uh might fall under that have those have internet or cellular access. But I'm also thinking about the Walkman's that we all have.

Uh the Discman that we all have. Yeah, I feel like that's what I have that would that would technically I think uh would Yeah, those would technically not be allowed under this policy. And I'm not actually sure we want to do that because I am actually all for uh creating a massive interest in uh Walkman as a way to provide uh really just sweet ambient music as a study tool.

This is actually a pro- hipster movement. They're coming back.

So, can we Yeah, let's just on that. Um, can we take out with or without?

If we were to strike or without and we we just say student owned personal electronic devices with internet or cellular connectivity capabilities, wearable or handheld. Is that an would that be okay if we cut that?

So, are we trying to remove Kindles because Kindles obviously are connected to the internet because that's how the books get downloaded. Why do you complicate everything?

and just uh Yeah, I don't know. I don't know about that one. I don't have We That lets back in your Bluetooth headphones unless you remove Bluetooth.

Dang it.

What would your headphones be attached to? If you can't attach to your phone, you wouldn't.

Right. But it's Bluetooth. The internet to the to the iPad or the Walkman. Oh, well, I mean, I can think of say a Nintendo Switch that someone could bring into school that's not connected to the internet, but it could be a big distraction. So, I don't know.

Are those already?

Yeah. I mean, but you know, some kind of gaming device or some kind of is that already um I mean, they're not explicitly banned in school, but and sometimes we do have them at school.

I do like the idea of somebody pulling that out in the middle of class and just being like, "This is fine." I mean, I know I've seen kids at lunch using them. And yeah, I know this is we're policying, which we do so well. Um, but uh I think to the like the spirit of this is I don't think we have a huge problem with people playing their Switch in classrooms right now would be my guess. Um or like reading their reading their Kindle in classrooms right now, right?

Too many books. Too many books.

So I guess I just want to I I understand why we want to consider those things in a pol in a policy discussion. And I think there's also like the reality of what we're trying to do here and the devices that are causing causing issues.

No, that's true. But if the language is already in here, do we need to take it out? I guess that's the question.

My preference is to remove without.

Yeah. I mean, I I I'm I'm going to ride for moving removing or without. I think that is a I think that is a very smart and good uh move. I'm not sure how to solve the Kindle um question. Um because also like like why doesn't an iPad fall under this? Um like a l like I assumed an iPad there school there's there's school but but I would assume that we allow for students if they No, I guess it's all personal. It's all personal mind.

Are apps on the school devices? Are they able to do rigid digital reading on their school devices?

Yes. Yep.

Yeah, they're pushed out like books, you know, through different apps and stuff.

I have a question. Are students allowed to bring their own laptops in instead of using the um devices provided by the school?

Sometimes we we have had kids want to do that for various reasons. Um it's very, you know, rare and there's few and far between. And Sam could actually probably speak more to this. They're they're they do they are restricted on what they can do. Uh and there's you know they're they're extenduating circumstances about that but it's very very rare.

Is it more common for them to have their own iPad though along with their laptop? Yes. Yeah. Yes.

Because that's what I meant like any of their own personal devices bringing it to school.

Yeah. Uh I it's not it's to Charlie's point. It's not terribly common. Um we it does happen but it's not super common. I think with the tools that our teachers are using with students, the digital tools, it's kind of one of those things where sometimes a kid will try it and bump into, oh, well, I don't have this piece of software or I don't have access to that and kind of go, okay, never mind. I'm not going to do that anymore. It is not I don't it's not explicitly forbidden.

Um but it is it's so it happens from time to time but it would be under this policy. Right. Correct.

Yeah. Which which I think in the in the in the pro category for that I think makes the policy all the more coherent, right? Like to say like the electronic devices with internet connectivity that may be used at school are those provided by the school. Um, and that's pretty that is pretty clearcut and um, so it's not it's not making a differentiation uh, between a phone, an iPad or a laptop in terms of a personal device um, that have those has those capabilities. Um, so yeah, I guess I see that as a pro. On the con, I don't know. Like it does like it does make me I I will just admit it makes me feel a little I I personally think that the the the issue that is we would really contend with is that like it's the devices that have um cellular connectivity because we can't monitor that. Like if a kid brings in their laptop and they get on the school guest network, we have a certain ability to it's not a great experience on the school.

No, it's als it's not. And also there's just less opportunity for a kid for a person I should say anybody to be fertive with a laptop as there is with a cell phone.

So the the opportunity for the kind of problematic behavior is just not the same threshold.

Yeah. I think I guess what I would just I guess say that in in our current Yeah.

Our this current policy though does make it more blanket and if we didn't want that we would have to have some carveouts. Yeah, we would say like, comma, except for uh Kindles, uh PlayStation Fives, uh you know, like whatever, whatever. Like we would need to like elucidate that. But then that's also us getting into that's that's the board getting into the weeds on on that when again that should be probably something that lives in the superintendent's office and the other administrator.

So I say there's no reason why the school couldn't come up with their own rules around that. So I feel like the essence of this policy is around cell phones essentially and I I would support removing or without Yeah. I I'll just add to the to the AirPods discussion. Um, uh, I think that would be pretty that that would cause perhaps more problems for kids than removing like than banning a cell phone. Just even even using their AirPods with their school laptops like that that or or not AirPods, but Bluetooth headphones that is extremely common. Um, in any study hall, you will see I don't know 40 50% of kids doing that. Um, and I guess we could provide them wired headphones. uh with wired headphones or say you know tough nuggies this is this is it but um I I understand where it's coming from. I would say the experience if anyone has ever done the like oh yes let me have AirPods announce text messages as they come in like you turn that off immediately you know like it's not like a I understand where it's coming from that it can connect to their phone and hear you can hear your text messages or whatever but it is not an experience that people will use you know it's like it's truly it's like a robot voice reading like you know your wife said that you need to get more cheeros at the grocery store you know it's like it's not It's not like it's but if it's all you got, would you do it? Cuz that's what we're talking about, right? I and we're trying to break this connection, right?

I just say that to say that to to your discussion about removing, you know, or without I think allowing some leeway for Bluetooth headphones and allowing that to be a decision at the school, I think would be wise because there's a lot of there's a lot that is an extremely common use even with kids who are have their cell phones in the holder. kids are pairing their Bluetooth headphones that they own to the school device that we're providing them.

I will also note that Morse didn't ban headphones.

Yeah. Did you say an issue or like there was more?

No, they said that there's no issue at all.

The kids that that was the one hill that they chose not to die on was letting them keep their headphones.

Yeah. And I think and I think that I think this is Yeah. I again so appreciative of the the perspective and I mean it makes me actually just Sam's thing makes me want to allow for it to happen if only that people use the computer voice because I think because again that's funny in a group text with you and four others Jaden said bra 67 yeah if we can have a carve out for that that would be fantastic but no just but in terms of the work before us tonight I think that this policy does not stip ipulate does does not make a list. So, this leaves it in the superintendent and the administrator's hands and and the building administrator's hands to make that list to to make that determination.

Um, uh, I think at that level of gran granularity. Um, but so I I don't know.

I guess maybe that's something we should think about is is do we want to leave it at like like electronic devices and you figure it out? But I don't I mean I guess the like if we move if we remove the or without that leaves airpods in the hands of the administrators to to see if it's an issue and if it's not to allow it because it seems clearly a a priority and if it does become an issue it still creates their ability within their framework to adjust as they need to.

Yes.

Yeah. I mean again yeah again I Yes.

Yes. I my my committee member chair hat face suggests that we just cut without and leave it otherwise not further uh enumerated.

Yeah Steph. Yeah, I guess I have the thought that it might be interesting to add a possibility for administrators to have an exception for specific educational purpose.

Yeah, I was uh you know thinking about you know the the art classes or the science classes or the you know I know we had previously talked about the art classes and you know maybe this is we buy 15 digital cameras to be used in art class. Um, yeah. I guess my my thought is um just in the spirit of keeping it in the hands of the administrators is maybe like because right now I'm assuming like there isn't an allowance for that. It doesn't appear to be there, right? Yeah. So, I mean, I guess that's I to me it feels like um especially given what some of the students said that they've used their phones for. It feels like something that we could allow each building to determine if they wanted to make an exception or if there was a procedure for making an exception and what that looked like. Um that doesn't, I guess, fly too much in the face of the intention that we're trying to to make in this policy. Yeah, I you know when we talk about slippery slopes, that's what I worry about there is like, well, you know, we could all use our calculators. It'd be really easy to use our calculators. Well, you could also use your laptop, right? Any functionality you have on your phone, you could use on your on your on your computer, right? So, um I I don't know. I guess I'm interested in Charlie and Tom's perspective on that one.

Yeah. I mean I I'm not I wasn't in the conversation when you like calling you said you intentionally did that. So I'm not sure exactly what the rationale was to intentionally not put in that phrase for to have like a at the hands of the educator or whatever. Uh but I do I do you know I think that there it is a slippery slope again and anytime we put these layers in where there's there's u you know ways to kind of get around it it causes tension it causes friction.

It it causes Charlie to be the one to stand there and say Mr. Melon can you make an exception for this? No. Then mom calls Charlie Melon. Why didn't you make this like that? That's the situation that it creates.

But and also know that like specifically like the the the cameras and photography class. We already have we we have lots of digital cameras for the for the kids.

Uh we have had um we have had uh the the photography teacher has these badges that kids wear uh when they go around taking pictures with their phones uh that says, you know, I'm allowed to use my phone because I'm taking pictures kind of a thing. Uh and that you know that that's that creates like why what why do they get to do you know these types of situations all over the place.

It pits teachers against teachers too like now this teacher wants to do it for this but it's not really the same as a photography class you know just like things like that pop up you know it's not it's not the end of the world and it you know uh but it is it just creates that kind of tension.

Yeah. And I think that I mean again I I maybe I misspoke a little bit. It wasn't that we had a huge discussion about leaving that out, but I was I was cons I was conscious that that wasn't there and I I was happy that it wasn't there because I think we had had the conversation about that we did have a conversation about having creating a maze of like just different ways in which this um could um circumvent different different different exceptions which again like on every individual exception was not a bad exception. Again, it's not a sort of bad good, but it's sort of how do we create as the as simple a policy and as as uniform a policy and again a policy where um again I just want to I want to reiterate that I think and I guess I'll I'm speaking to the students on this as as much as to um some of the parents who've weighed in on this. I think there is a sense that this policy is in re is in reaction to um uh kind of bad kids like kids that kids that can't can't handle themselves um that kids that aren't as good as other kids um at whatever at sort of at device at device management or about like uh self-regulation. And that is just like I I'll just say personally that I that I again I just um I'm not going to get worked up. I just I uh I really don't want that to be part of the conversation because it because it is it it is not relevant. Um this is not about good and bad kids. This is not about um are you coming from a family um or an economic situation um or uh some sort of social stability where you have been provided with the resources to allow for you to develop those um techniques where other students have not had that same opportunity and therefore you get to be a good student and someone else who doesn't have that is a bad student. Um, so again like yeah the idea of like a badge is like good student, good photo student, you know, like again like makes sense why we have it, but again I think the fewer carveouts we have for that um the better. And I just wanted to add um I came up to add that um part some of the consideration that we for the next round of devices um and in considering an iPad it is with sort of this more casual camera and fieldwork use in mind as opposed to um a laptop form factor where you can't really do that sort of thing.

um it's not really for photog. The camera on an iPad isn't really good for photography class, but it is good enough to take a picture if you are out in the field doing a science experiment. Um and so that's that's some of the thought that is one of the use cases that we envision um in considering that change of device.

I think relatedly something that popped into my mind, but it wasn't the forum to do so when um the example of using it in class came up. Um not every student has a cell phone or they have a cell phone that maybe isn't as capable as others.

And I think having that be everyone has the same equipment um from an education standpoint is super helpful and helps with the education piece that we're trying to do because everybody is starting from the same starting point and I think that's super important of these are the tools that you have that happens in real life you have a certain amount of tools that you can't always buy your way out of and how are you going to solve this problem with these tools. And I think taking out this um non-standard item allows for that education piece to be a little bit more level.

And I think the other date, the other part of the date that I appreciate is that provides a little more time to look at the curriculum like how are we using them now and how can we come up with an alternative that meets the needs, right?

it gives a little bit more time for those discussions to happen. Sorry, Seth.

No, I just wanted to say I appreciate everyone's thoughts and um it's helpful because kind of where that suggestion was coming from is I don't want to feel like we're limiting something that would feel like it was furthering educational opportunities for kids. So, yeah, thank you all for sharing. Yeah, but I think on that stuff I think I think actually I think we need to own that we like it's not that this is like um without various impacts. I think like I think I think we should I think we we need to own that um that this policy would for example if a if a kid has the the most recent iPhone that has a better camera on it um than the iPad that is given by the school that that does uh then limit what that student can do during school hours um in terms of like a photography assignment.

It does and I think we just need to own that that that that it does. So, I think it's not saying that it like it has no impact. Um, it does. Um, but it's an impact that we accept.

Yeah, I think that's I think that's a really good kind of place to start from this whole conversation, right? Nothing says that this is easy and you know, you should just it's fine. Just put your phone away. You'll be okay. Like that's not a fair way to approach this conversation. I mean, there are impacts.

There are real impacts on how people communicate. there are real impacts on how people are using it in classes. Um, but I think what the board has has come to the conclusion based on the vote to enact this policy is that the benefits for mental health and for education and for um, you know, for the students as as whole as a whole outweigh those those changes that the the limitations that come, right? like there are ways that we will navigate the impacts, right? We will find ways we'll talk about the headphones. We'll talk about how do you communicate with your parents. Um, you know, we'll find ways to to to to fill those gaps and maybe they won't be as perfect or as instantaneous, but they will they will work. Um, and the benefit of not having that device, you know, connected all day. um the the benefit overall will be worth it. So I I think that's important to acknowledge.

Okay. So where are we?

Right. I'll just I'll just give back some things that I've heard. We're going to cut the without um we are going to look into some of these questions around what are other policies that cover this question of of um of uh taking taking photographs and sort of privacy that sort of question just so we have like a frame of reference for that. Um I think we at least in the current conversation we are not um we are not uh being directed to add accommodations in more broadly. I would like to just run that by a few more a few more professionals. I' like I like read that by Alicia and her team if not some other folks that Tom might identify just to sort of see like again beyond the sort of the legal well I guess it really fundamentally legally but then are there other things that we're not uh looking at um uh there had been some conversation about perhaps moving some of the points um that I that I agree are slightly um uh kind of clawed off a little random. Um and then and then another thing. Yeah. No.

And also um Yeah. And and I and I'll and I'll own like that first one at all grade levels, the student communication that like I I like that jumped out at me being like that feels really weird until somebody sort of explained is like no well that's just to make clear about the like uh parents and kids can still get in touch with each other. This is how they do it. Yeah. Um so again like there I think there's reason for all of those.

Um, I'm open to just saying I mean I'm I'm totally game for us to take this back and to kind of look at those uh those last um couple of sentences and see whether we can incorporate those in or or maybe there's another subheader um that we add in there. But I I don't think that's I'm not reading that as a um as a substantive or a uh conceptual change more of an organizational and and um and clarity. Uh is that is that accurate?

Um so that's what I've heard so far. Other things. Yeah.

Yeah. Um this is not super substant but just a couple of little things that might be help clean things up a little bit. Uh the bullets that cross from the first to the second page. The third and the four fourth bullet seem really kind of redundant to me. I almost feel like the third bullet could be removed because the fourth bullet says pretty much the same thing.

For continue or repeated and then repeated or serious. Yeah. Yeah.

Yeah. Good. Let's I'm going to I'm going to I'm going to I'm going to take that and I'm going to I'm going to strike it.

Strike it. I'm going to strike it right now.

My next thought was that there's a a a sentence in here about how the school unit will not be responsible for loss, theft, damage, blah blah blah. Um, I just am curious about what the thinking was about including that because doesn't that kind of apply to pretty much any student property?

Uh again that was language that we did we did we did inherit from the um the sample carried but I think the way I unders the way I kind of understood it was that the um the the policy leaves it to the administration to make a uh the determination of what the the technique is going to be for the the storage or the keeping them off. and that like if they decided there's going to be a big bucket um in the front and everything gets put in the big bucket, this just clarifies that that um that we're not responsible for uh breakage of your iPhone. I think that's what I wouldn't discuss. We didn't discuss that, but that's but I would say so like if if we developed like a central location, it's like, okay, you bring in your phone, we've got this central location.

It's not on us if some other kid picks it up.

Or I think probably more likely because I don't know if we're going to have a big bucket, um is if you have to confiscate a phone, right, and it has to sit in the office, right?

Um I mean I mean I think I think Kelly, your question is like isn't that probably true just generally? And I would assume it. I would assume it is.

Yeah. Does it need to be spelled out in this policy? I guess that's my my real question.

I don't think it hurts because we're really trying to tell Maybe just don't even bring it.

Yeah.

Um the the next par while we're going down the paragraphs the the next paragraph here I feel like maybe we could put digital citizenship or on like the stuff at the end more towards the beginning because like schools will include the appropriate use of cell phones smartwatches and the in educating students. I think we're talking about schools will work on educating students about the appropriate use of cell phones and citizenship. Like I don't know. It just to your point to me it's actually included in the first paragraph already. It says Yeah. And we added that to the first paragraph, right? So So maybe we've cleared that up. Yeah.

Yeah. I don't know. I think I don't mind it there. I just feel like maybe we could jumble the words to be a little clearer.

I'm I'm I I think if if it is the board's pleasure, uh I think we could take that back and kind of mess with it a little bit and see whether there's like an education subheader that we kind of put in there that is not purely repetitive. Um I think I will own that in the discussion um the to to Chris's earlier point about the our emphasis on education um that I really want to make as as much as possible I want to make sure we're not creating a policy that tells the administration that they need to create an educational structure. Um but effectively we don't mean it. Um because I I I have experience with some of our policies in the past that have uh sort of more subtle um mandates uh for the administration to do certain educational um uh um take certain educational measures that have not happened. Um and I think that again given the rationale for this um that's just not acceptable. Right. Um that that needs that needs to h that needs to happen. And so I think it I think just finding a way to make sure that it is clear.

Um so again that's where that's again we didn't write that in that way but that's why it's been that's why I probably didn't pick up on it quite as much.

Yeah. So my my thought about this is like so we've had you know we had this discussion about AI use in schools and how there's this multi multi-phase process for professional development and all that kind of thing. It's like my thought on this policy isn't that we are it's not a restriction policy. It's say that we we use this to have our kids graduate out of our high school with that knowledge of how to effectively use their their their devices. A knowledge that like as a millennial I definitely did not get that I really wish I would have gotten um but kind of didn't exist at the time. And so that education piece is like more important than the restrictions in any way I I find. And so having that kind of multiple times I think is really important. I agree.

I also think that could be a really great way to use the students voice again to have the students involved and what kind of education they would like to see. I heard that in public comment earlier that people were saying that they students were saying that they wanted the opportunity to learn how to use a cell phone by having a cell phone during school.

And um I hear that point. I I think that's a it's a helpful point to to ponder. Um if we're continuing with this um plan to have a bell-to-bell um phone free time, then how else can we be educating them and how else do they think like what what do they think would be helpful? Um what do they want to learn about?

Am I making any sense? Yep.

Yeah, totally. Um, I think that would be a great way to continue to have their participation.

Um, and I think maybe Stephanie, you had brought this up before, also asking them to help with um, data tracking and deciding what to look at. So, I'm just thinking of other ways that they can be involved um, as I think those are two ways that I'd love to see them still involved in the process.

I guess the I if I'm opening up a a can of worms that we don't want to open, that's fine. So, just let me know. But, um to me, the yonder bag versus not discussion actually really changes this educational point because if it's an off and away policy that is uh requiring someone to not use their phone if it's in their bag, right? And so, um, I guess where I I I've kind of was I was kind of there when we talked about it the first time, um, and it wasn't as wellreceived because we hadn't talked to administrators around what we thought the best um, implementation policy was yet. But to me, given where we are in budget constraints and the overwhelming feedback that we've also received from the students, not doing a yonder bag feels like a really easy decision to me at this point. And so I guess I wanted to name that just because we also still have students in the the audience and a lot of them came. Um and so I just wanted to name that um as my perspective. And then two I think that that opens up the educational conversation a bit more where we are talking about okay you're going to have to have your phone off and away um with a with a cell phone free bell-to-bell situation. So um yeah that's a good point.

So, can I ask a a question on the last paragraph?

Sequential learning. I'm just moving down the page. Um, we're talking about parent, excuse me, teachers, staff being conscious of their impact with the phones, not using it during um instruction supervision except as permitted in this policy. Where do we permit staff to use their phones in this policy?

If they were diabetic and needed that the medical exception, don't they have their own policy? policy they do and that policy is up for consideration as a cross reference. Okay.

We haven't we've taken a first glance at it but we haven't fully plumbed into it yet.

I think yeah I mean that's a it's a it's a very very good catch. I mean I think like the the language here again which is not what we crafted but what we did inherit but it does seem to be um very consciously created like it's the should be right. Um, and then there's also avoid. Um, which avoids the nursing nursing word, right? It doesn't say like will not will not use it.

Um, but like avoid using it. Um, so I think that um I think you're right, Tom, that I think it's meant to probably capture those like, you know, like you're not going to say to a somebody uh who's using it for a diabetes monitor, you're not going to say like avoid using it, right?

Um, right. like but um but yes I mean I think I mean I think we uh we had a a bit a small conversation about the question of like yes what um uh because it was brought up I can't remember whether it was Maria or whether it was Phoebe um uh before had sort of had raised us the question of equity um in terms of like if this is something that the that the students are not allowed um to use uh their phones um during this time um should uh should staff um and I think it's a really good question and um we I think uh this does not cover that.

Um we're we are going to look at look at that question in terms of the um uh the staff policy. I will say that we currently like I mean I guess I'll speak for myself. I don't I did not hear like arousing um articulation from the committee or from Tom to like to to really revise that policy and to make it stricter. I also don't know what um what sort of uh things we would have to deal with there in terms of like uh the staff policy deals more with staff should not use their phones in a way that interferes with their work or for inappropriate uses. I think what's different here is something that I I personally I think we should name which is that the way adults use their phones is part of the problem. It's not about the way all about the way that kids use their phones. The way that adults in the schools and in homes use their phones and model for kids is part of what we're contending with. And we should we are asking adults to be mindful that their example is important.

Yeah. Yeah. Absolutely. And again and I think I think it's I think it's I think it is it behooves us to sort of to to to own the kind of like um that adults um are can be addicted to their to their phone in the in in very similar ways. I think there are questions about sort of like brain development and and that and that sort of thing that I think are part of this, but I think it's something that we should look at. But I think for our purposes tonight that we're not trying to address that and we're not we're we're not looking at that at that equity issue uh fully. Um but that is something that we will be looking at when we um uh look at the staff policy. But I was just going to say I don't I'm just curious what um in terms of uh sort of teacher contracts or sort of the union uh rules or something. I don't know like we haven't gotten anything anywhere into any of that and I'm curious what that would look like.

Okay. So I'm going to ask the policy committee if they feel like they have the direction they need for revision.

Did we wrap up the question about in school out of school? Are we making any changes around that and the timing of I think there was I took down was that based on Michelle's this is that under first side under the section misuse of cell phones and other electronic devices second paragraph if we preede the first sentence with the phrase at all times including outside of the school day use of cell phones and that that talks about the privacy areas that delineates how it's not just a school to a day a school day ban for those things.

So, are we saying that a student after school hours can't use their phone in the bathroom or locker room? In the bathroom, locker room.

Period. Okay.

Well, it's it's saying um in places where privacy is generally expected. Okay.

But yeah, but I think yeah, I think it is a really important I think it's a really important change does so I guess the locker room lock that but yes once the bell has rung um other uses on property are yeah because the first thing guidelines for phone free school day again and then this is outside the school day we're not creating Um, it's not a Are we Yes. Anding this?

Well, it's not We're not policing it when you're waiting in the lobby for your mom to pick you up after school is over.

Just don't take it into the locker room and do sketchy things, right?

Well, but I guess I Sorry if I'm going too much in the weeds, but to me it's like, so you're not allowed to text in the bathroom after the bell rings. I mean, I get like not recording someone.

It says voice and visual or something along those lines. No, but it says prohibited in bathrooms, locker rooms, and other places.

Yeah, it says use of phones that have cameras is strictly prohibited. So, like if you were just checking your text messages to see if your mom texted you.

Yeah, I think it would be like is prohibited if you're going to be taking photos or using voice recording.

How about uses of cameras or video is strictly prohibited in bathrooms, locker rooms, yada yada yada.

What about phone calls? Because you don't know what the other person on the other line is doing. When I go into Planet Fitness, as I used to do before I was a superintendent, um, back when you had time, it just says, you know, no self, you don't use the cell phone in the locker room. Um, that to me that's pretty standard.

I think that's probably where I would fall right now is to just say that like I think it's perfectly I don't know. I think it's perfectly reasonable to say like you don't you don't use your cell phone in the bathroom or the locker room at school. They don't they don't need to after hours anyway because they can use they gota you know they got to read their Kindle app that's on the you know it's on the phone.

I'm not I'm not weighing in on either way. I'm just saying like the way it reads it means you can't use you can't use it period flag it. Again it's one of those things where we're we are I think just we would own it that like that's we're saying like yes after the bell rings um if you go into the bathroom no you can't text your mom.

Just wait till you come out. Wait, you wait to Right. Yeah. But again, just like just just be very clear that we are saying that in this current version.

One more thing maybe. Are we striking in schools on here or in the title?

Are we leaving it as in schools? Are we including this at school events for I'm thinking now of our addendum to the misuse?

Well, the first paragraph does specify while students are part participating in school sponsored activities also, right? So, I'm wondering if we want to remove in schools because some of this is school related for sure, but not in the school. Like, how in the weeds do we want to get for that?

I mean because it could be an you know there's employee use of cell phones this could just be student use of cell phones and other personal electronic devices period. the we we had discussed a little bit about open campus and about how like we struggled with kind of figuring out if we wanted to like we didn't at least for for me at least I didn't want to like have kids go out for open campus and like have their phone locked away in a yonder bag that they can't use. That seemed really unsafe to me. That seemed you we they were in an environment that was not something that that we were kind of controlling. So like it was it was bell-to-bell but also within the doors is what I thought we had discussed.

Yes. So on site. So I guess that's a good point that I kind of breezed by during the school day and while students are participating in other school sponsored activities.

So sports events.

Is that a sport event? Sporting event like watch at a game or something or more field trip. Yeah.

Is this more field trip driven? Right. But maybe during the school day, which we may need to school sponsored events during the school day when they go overseas. Yep.

Yeah.

But that would prevent I mean that would mean if it's an after school basketball game that that doesn't count. But if it's school during the day but what if it's open campus during the day?

I see. Right.

So should that sentence end with other school sponsored activities during the school day? It says while on school grounds. Where does it say that? Uh the first bullet.

Yeah. So that's what we had kind of talked about is like within the school day and within the confines of effectively what we can regulate and control.

Okay. Right. But if they're on a field trip, for example, or not permitted, we had discussed about bus transportation on field trips. Um it was I think um principal Galo said effectively it's really difficult to to regulate that and to enforce it. If you have one you have one um chapro chapra it's like the whole bus it's really really hard to do right so just I think I think yeah sorry no I was just going to say there's just a bus driver on the bus to region 10 and for that person to have to enforce that would be very while he's driving a bus we did drive the bus I remember now this policy we're discussing it and we added language to the first bullet while on school grounds during the school that that was when we added that and it was about the open canvas situation. We wanted to make a policy that we can actually enforce, right?

That's true.

Right. Um, so I think I think the f I think the the first bullet is I think our current our current gospel of what we mean. Um, I think if we actually like just put a period um after and other personal electronic devices um yeah then there's not confusing because then we just say that the intent of this body is to support a focused learning environment. We don't then go into any further detail. It's not during the school day or end while like again we're just stating the intent of the policy and then the detail of that is handled in the in the first uh bullet.

And do we want to from the title remove the last two words in schools and add at the beginning student use of that makes sense to me.

Okay. Then would you want to strike while students are participating in other school sponsored activ and then I think there were some suggestions around headings that educ enforcement and consequences and education. I have that noted first.

Enforcement consequences.

Um, are you guys ready for a vote?

Yes. So, I think again we would go back, we would take these thoughts, we wouldn't fuss with very many other uh with other things. Um uh or if we did uh we would then come to you and say here's why we fussed we fussed with it. Um I think um yeah I'm trying to think if there's anything else we would just bring it back for a second read and we bring it back for a second read.

And I think also just again to just reiterate that this this is um we're creating this policy and we're creating it as something that that is that is overarching over uh the schools and is leaving space very deliberately uh for the superintendent and the administrators to determine what the procedures are. Um, and also then to adjust them to be able to adjust them and be able to um, uh, yeah, to to to either make things more strict, less strict, again, like as they as they um, deem appropriate. Um, I mean, I guess I'll just I guess I'll just put you on the spot, Charlie, to just say like asis, does this seem like something that would be work relatively work? I'm not really saying do you like it or do you approve of it, but is this workable? Is this workable from a practical standpoint? Yeah, I would say absolutely and I appreciate the the thought around like not creating rules that are not enforceable. You know, that's that's always a difficult place to be and it especially when we're starting something new. Uh we don't want to start something new when we know right away that we can't enforce it but um or elements of it. But no, yes, I think this is a great uh starting point and and definitely uh workable for sure. Thanks, Troy.

Okay. So, we have a first and we have a second on the floor like two hours ago. Um, yeah, we're gonna have 20 minutes.

We're actually going to have to take a vote on whether we can move on to 11B here in a second. Um, um, yeah. Any other comments, questions? All those in favor?

Great. None opposed. All right. So our we do have a policy that says if it we go past 10 pm, we then have to have a vote on whether we want to continue with the rest of our agenda.

Um so right now we have second read of the AEDs and then we have um public comments and executive sessions. Um I would say we certainly want to get through the second read of the AED uh because I think that's a relatively quick one. Uh obviously want to keep time for public comment. Um and then then maybe we can talk to Tom about I would say the executive sessions are important especially since we have a staff member present. Okay. Who is really waiting patiently for us?

Okay. Um okay. So uh do I have a motion for to extend our meeting past 10 p.m.?

Cara Chris. Thank you. All those in favor? Great. None opposed.

Who is it who used to always vote no?

There was always somebody who would vote no. Maybe it was Naomi. Um, let's Okay, let's say Maddie. No, because they need to come back to the board and join. Um, okay. So, now we're I'm going to get a motion.

Uh, do I have a motion for consideration approval for the second read of the following policy, EBCF, automated external defibrillators, AEDs?

Kelly and Cara, thank you. All those Oh, I won't say yet. I will vote yet.

We're not favoring yet. So, um we are bringing this to you um uh with the only change being um the uh should to will um in the first uh paragraph. Um but otherwise it is as you saw it uh on first read. Comments, questions, it says should. It says should but it will. No, it was should. It will be will.

I think what we wanted is there will be at least one in the tomorrow. It needs to be it needs to be will. Yeah, I think is what we're being told by the spirits. Okay. Okay. Comments, questions on that?

All those in favor? Great. Thank you.

All right. So, uh, we are no unfinished new business personnel issues. We do have public comment.

Same rules apply. Three minutes. Tell us your name.

My name is Whitman Happy and I'm from Dur Durham and Freeport. And um I would just like to say that I feel like it's unnecessary for the AirPods and smartwatch part of the policy because um like a teacher would very easily notice if you're talking to no one or or if they see you on your watch like like they're going to notice that and then they're going to catch you. So I feel like that's unnecessary. And also like the part about like listening to music when you study, I don't think it should need like a um like a provided device to listen to music on because like a lot of pe for a lot of people um like they need that to help like study and like like tone in onto what they're doing because like some people's brains are just scattered. Um, for me especially, like I love music and it's really important for me to like find time in the day to listen to it, especially when I'm studying because it helps me study. Um, so I feel like taking that away isn't like um it's not good for a lot of students.

So um music is very important to a lot of students and I feel like taking that away along with phones is just like too much and there's a lot of control at play, but I just feel like it's just unnecessary.

That's all all I'll say.

Thank you. Could you tell me your name one more time? I'm sorry I missed it. Uh Whitman Happy. Thank you.

You can go again, Emily. You You hung in there. You get to go again. Um I'm Emily Kelch uh from Freeport and I just want to uh like say um my thoughts um I think as students we're going to need a lot of insight as to why because genuinely making the you know I've listened to the last few meetings I've really done research into this and uh hearing the mostly I mean the main argument is you know you're addicted to your phone and that is such a generalized assumption about every teenager. And I think it's very uh ethnosentric to make that because it's not true and it's not the reality for a lot of us. um a lot of us can manage it appropriately and uh before we move to the total bell-to-bell ban and anything else um I think I urge you guys to do a pilot approach um to work to see if it's even if it's even going to help the majority of students because enacting something that's only going to you know cause more stress and cause more anger between the students I don't think is a very smart idea. Um it's just going to cause more chaos and I just urge you guys to really into the students to for that and like to try to experience I mean we go to school and we're expected to try our hardest for five hours of instructional time and that is a lot and we like put in so much effort during those five hours in the 40 minutes that you're talking about taking away for the phones like we just we use that to relax and I I really truly think that free choice is important and I think that there's other ways to teach kids how to manage that so that's just all my thoughts but thank you guys thank you for your time thank you Emily All right. Uh, do I move on to item 16?

Do I have a motion to enter into executive session as outlined in one MRSA section 4056A for the purpose of discussing a personnel matter?

Kelly Cara. Thank you. All those in favor? Great.

Uh, we moving

============================================================

RSU5 BOARD OF DIRECTORS MEETING TRANSCRIPT
Meeting Date: January 14, 2026
Source File: transcript_2026-01-14_Paj4BH2VkwY.txt
District: Regional School Unit 5 (Freeport, Durham, Pownal, Maine)
============================================================

a lot of different lot of different areas and I appreciate that and I wish her I wish her well. Okay, so um so we have one current sheet that will be there until they appoint someone new. Uh but we will get started with the pledge of allegiance to the flag of the United States of America and to the republic for which it stands, one nation under God, indivisible, with liberty and justice for all.

Okay. Do I have a motion for consideration and approval of the minutes from the December 10th, 2025 meeting as presented, barring any errors or omissions?

Thank you. Second, Anna. All those in favor?

opposed adjustments to the agenda. I do have an adjustment to the agenda.

Yes. Item 12A, which is consideration going early childhood special education transition. Um I'm going to ask to defer that vote, but I do have information about that.

Okay. Wonderful.

Um All right. So we will move on to good news and recognition and we will look to Moon for for that report.

All right. So to start off um juniors last Wednesday had an assembly to talk about mental health and like how to help your friend if they're struggling with mental health. um and kind of just we also put up information around our schools with um with staff members so students know who to go to and who to reach out with contact information but also outside resources to support mental health. And then on January 9th, uh, Freeport High School sent seven students to the main, uh, Thespian Festival, which is like a day for main high schoolers devoted to theater. And, um, two of them, uh, Honor Reagan and Nick Mallet, both achieved, um, superior designations for their musical performance, um, which qualifies them for the International Festival this summer in, uh, Bloomington, Indiana. So, that's fairly good. And then also um coming up on January 27th is our 8th grade family and student night. And so we hope to um welcome the class of 2030 and you know help offer them the courses that we have and hopefully we they have a nice smooth adjustment. And then uh last last couple weeks um the track team got some new school records broken and so we have Tyler Burns in the triple jump uh Brady Weber in the high jump and 55 meter hurdles. uh Lucy Huggin 800 meters and then the girls medly relay with Ruby Smith, Emma Graham, Llaya Hall, and Mattie York. And then lastly, um student leadership is planning next month um when I'm back on to share information of what we've been up to.

Sounds like you're busy. And add to all of that midterms next week.

All right. Well, thank you for that. Um so we will move on to item seven on the agenda which is public comment. Uh so we ask if we have folks that are interested in speaking that they come to the microphone. Uh they give us their name and the town that they live in and um keep comments to three minutes. I don't know if we have anyone who Oh, we have a list. It's coming our way.

Thank you. All right. So we do have a few folks and um so yep your name, your town and three minutes and we will we will keep a timer. So if you hear it just uh uh if you hear it go off just try to sort of wrap up your thought um so we can hear from from everyone who wants to speak. So we will start with Hazel Superintendent Gray. Madam Chair, Madame Vice Chair, members of the board, and others gathered at this meeting. My name is Hazel Gallet, a Freeport High School sophomore and varsity player on the Freeport High School girls tennis team.

I'm here today to encourage the proposal to allocate funds to resurface and improve the tennis courts of Freeport High School. According to the United States Tennis Association guidelines, an unsafe court contains any of the following: uneven surfaces, cracks, raised lines, discoloration, debris, consistent wetness or moisture after rainfall, tripping hazards, or other abrasions that would cause poor footing.

Ask anyone who is on the team or anyone who has stepped foot onto the courts during the tennis season or off seasons, and they would account for seeing most or all of these unsafe conditions present. Since starting high school, I, like many of my fellow teammates, have developed a passion for tennis. From having a growing tennis community my freshman year to dedicating my time in the fall and winter to honing my skills for the upcoming season. However, I cannot truly enjoy the sport when I am worried about for my safety and the safety of my teammates the moment we step onto the court. From warm-ups to game play, we are constantly in motion up, down, and across the courts. As we are moving, however, our attention drifts from the play at hand to making sure we do not injure ourselves traversing the court. There are consistent cracks, dead areas, weeds, and fishies in the court where the grass has made its way through temporary sandfilled cracks that were used in an attempt during last year's tennis season to make our courts appear safe for game play. During the seasons, I am relieved to play away matches as the conditions of our neighboring courts, our neighboring schools courts far surpass the conditions of the courts at Freeport. I should be able to feel pride playing at home, pride in our team and the grounds we practice on. But I admit the immense relief I feel not having to consistently worry about hitting the wrong spot or stepping somewhere that could injure in injure me or my teammates. Injuries that were unfortunately experienced by many of my teammates last spring due to the inadequate playing surface. I do not think that any team should have to at the lineup before a match apologize for the conditions of their court, ask players to mine their footing, and if they feel the play is unfair due to dead areas of the court or large cracks, to replay a point.

Let us also think about the reputation of Freeport High School. We pride ourselves on having facilities that are safe and available to everyone, from our well-maintained turf used for soccer, field hockey, football, lacrosse, and track, and our well-kept baseball and softball fields. And let us not forget our $17 million performing arts center and money allocated to the swim team to use clean, well-managed facilities at the YMCA. However, the same cannot be said for the tennis courts. Not only are they smaller than all neighboring schools that we play against with only three courts instead of the usual five, but they are by far the least managed and maintained grounds at FHS. How do we look as a team, as a school, as a regional school unit if our courts are cracked, broken, and a danger to the teams we host throughout the season and members of the community who take advantage of the courts to play with their children, friends, and partners throughout the year? How are we supposed to feel as a team when we travel to other schools who welcome us with tennis facilities that are well-kept, allowing us to keep our thoughts on the game instead of being worried about rolling an ankle or having to replay a vital point because of an unsafe, unplayable tennis surface. I stand up here today with members of my team and tennis booster association imploring you to allocate funds to resurface and improve tennis facilities. By doing so, you are providing teams, coaches, visiting schools, members of the community, and anyone who wishes to spend time outside active the chance to do so worry-f free.

Give us the means to take our minds off injury and worry, and allow us to focus on playing our best and representing Freeport in both play and the grounds we play on. Thank you.

Thank you, Hazel. Sophie.

Good evening everyone. My name is Sophie White and I'm a Freeport resident. I'm standing here today not just as a tennis player, but as someone who truly cares about our team and our community. Tennis has given us more than just matches and practices. It has given us friendship, confidence, and a place where we feel supported and motivated. For many of us, the courts are where we unwind after a long day, challenge ourselves, and feel like we belong. Right now, those courts are holding us back. Because of their condition, our team is unable to train and compete the way we should. Cracked surfaces and unsafe areas don't only affect how we play, they make it unsafe to play at all. We're losing matches and opportunities. We're losing match opportunities and watching a sport we love and care about become a lot harder to access. This doesn't just affect our team. These courts affect are affected and used by everyone in the community.

They're where kids first learn how to play, where families spend time together, and where people come to stay active and healthy. When the courts are unable to play, everybody loses that opportunity. We have committed players, dedicated coaches, and a community of play players that value the sport equally. All we are asking is for a chance to play safely and proudly on the courts that reflect the passion and effort we put into this game. Investing in these courts isn't only fixing concrete. It's investing in young people in the community connection and a sport that brings people together. We love tennis. We love the team. And we deserve courts that allow us to play. Thank you.

Thank you, Sophie Phoebe.

Uh, my name is Phoebe Williamson. I'm a Freeport resident. Good evening, members of the board and Superintendent Gray.

For those of you who don't know, I'm a proud member of the FHS girls tennis team. And, um, I think redoing the tennis courts would provide immense value to our athletes, RSU5, um, students, and the entirety of the community. The reconstruction of the FHS tennis courts has been something that the school board and the community has been putting off for many years. And while I recognize the reality of the fiscal and logistical challenges with the project, the neglect of our courts has led to dangerous circumstances for our teams and the refusal of other schools to play us at our home courts.

There will never be a perfect budget year for a project like this, but the furtherance of the abandonment of our courts will only lead to a more expensive and difficult project in the future. Not only does having high quality and safe tennis courts benefit the boys and girls tennis teams, but the entire FHS and RSU 5 community. Students in all four grades at the high school utilize the tennis courts in gym classes for various net games and spend valuable outdoor time learning sports that they can enjoy throughout their lives.

Taxpaying community members also use the courts for pickup games and as an inexpensive and accessible way to exercise and enjoy the outdoors.

However, our tennis courts can only benefit the whole community like this when they're safe and free from hazards, which is not the case currently. While it won't be an easy project and surely not a cheap one, the investment in our schools and community that these rep repairs represent is one that is extremely valuable to all RSU5 students and stakeholders. Thank you for your time.

Thank you, Phoebe.

Colin still holding out for your D1 offer for tennis. So, all right. Um Schedua, I'm sorry if I you you'll tell us how to say it.

Hi. Uh, good evening members of the school board. Thank you for this opportunity to speak. My name is Schwa Gway and I'm a Freeport resident and I have never played tennis. U, but last year as a parent of a new tennis player, I decided to go to a boosters meeting and support my child and just figure out how the season goes. And so now you're looking at the new president of the tennis boosters.

And I bet some parents can figure out how that went down. Um, so but I'm so glad that I was kind of volunttoled into this opportunity because I had uh I feel like I had a unique perspective to see how hard these players work. Um the passion that they have and what a great sport and lifelong sport that tennis is.

And I got to see, you know, kind of a behind the scenes um uh uh view of how um supportive the coaches are for the students and the players. So it's it was it's been a great opportunity. and I'm so glad that um it went down the way it did. Um tennis uh serves is a sport that serves a wide range of students. It's inclusive, promotes promotes lifelong fitness and provides opportunities for students who may not be drawn to contact sports. So, it's um really vital for our school um for mental health and well-being of our students. So, um, regardless to say, while maintaining expanded courts will really encourage participation, allow our school to host matches and events that reflect positively on our community as well as support the safety of our students. Uh, we are a fairly new boosters. Um, I took over in the second year and the boosters had just started the year prior to me.

And so, um, you know, I have a great group of, uh, other parents that have volunteered to work alongside me and have worked really hard to support the students, um, and fund raise with a tennis tournament, pickle ball tournament, bottle drives, um, whatever we needed to do. And we are able to um hopefully support the the students this year um just in the basics of you know helping them with uniforms, possibly snacks for for the um the teams in between and travel um and you know the awards ceremony. So we're fairly new and we're working on getting the funds. So, um really, you know, I encourage the the board to um support the investment that's going to be made for the community as well as the students. Um thank you. Thank you for your time and consideration.

Thank you. So, that was all that we had on our list. Were there anyone else that didn't get the list?

Hi, I'm Molly Meyer. I'm the Freeport High School girls tennis coach. Um, thank you Phoebe and Sophie and Hazel.

Thank you Schwa for speaking on behalf of redoing the courts. Um, you know, as this is on the agenda, I just wanted to give some context to this project for those of you who are on the board who have not been emailing and talking to with um, increasing frequency. So, um, I, you know, I started with the team last season, and what I found was a high school tennis program that had had a lot of coaching turnover in the last few years, um, some less than ideal conditions for kids, and a group of athletes that were hanging in there, were committed to tennis, but, um, had definitely been affected by what they had experienced as a team in the past.

Um, we also had a significant number of athletes who had never picked up a racket before or had any formal tennis instruction. Um, we didn't have enough usable uniforms for the team, so we had to improvise. Um, the school helped us buy some very inexpensive tank tops. Um, the boosters club had been recently formed when I started. Um, and they had almost no funds to support the team. So we had to figure out how to have team dinners and an award ceremony with very little funding. Um luckily we now have a wonderful boosters in place and um we are increasing you know they are increasing the funding for the tennis program which I'm really excited to see what we can do with that. Um, but you know, sort of slowly over the course of the season with some new energy and attention and kind of thinking carefully about what these athletes needed, I think I and my fellow coaches were able to build a strong foundation of a program, um, a really positive view of tennis and team competition, um, and a true sense of community and camaraderie among the team, which I'm very proud of.

Um, I I will emphasize though that this is just a foundation. Um, and in order to continue to build on what we have started, to continue to bring kids to the program, to have there be a viable tennis program at the high school, we urgently need the board's support. Um, anyone looking at the courts last spring could see they were badly in need of attention. Um, and by the end of our season last May, it was clear to me and clear to I think many of our players that these courts were not safe. Um and you know that has been borne out by you know a company that has recently declared them not safe for play for this spring. Um you know I I personally feel um relieved that we are not going to try continue to try to put our players on these courts and and you know not put them at risk of serious injury um for this spring. that um you know because of that over the summer you know we started talking about having these courts redone um I talked to Jason Chisum you know the facilities lead for the high school Glenn Reynolds um the facilities director of RSU5 and in August I met with the facilities committee um of this school board and we agreed on a tenative path forward to try to start redoing the courts um That path forward included an RFP process to select a company to start doing the engineering and design plans for the courts. Um, with some significant work by Glenn and his team, you know, we're very slowly getting that uh process off the ground. Um, I think it's important to note that it's not just the high school teams that use these courts. Um they're used almost continuously throughout the times of the year when it's warm enough to play and there's not snow on the courts. Um we have about 35 high school players, boys and girls that use the courts in the spring um starting at the end of March.

They're also used by the PE department at FHS. Um the Freeport Middle School boys and girls teams use them in the fall and in the summer RSU5 community programs offers tennis camps and group group lessons on the courts. Um, and as people have noted, they're also used frequently by members of the community as they're the only public courts in Freeport. Um, you know, in my opinion, one of the primary missions of public education is to give kids experiences they otherwise might not have access to and to build skills and confidence that help them go out into the world. And I see these courts as falling into that mission. Um, you know, the kids of Freeport, Powell, and Durham deserve your support in moving this forward and funding this project. Um, and I really appreciate the board's work so far on doing that. Um I I will add that um the number that you're looking at right now from my uh understanding is not a firm number um for this design process and that um you know we may need to come back to you and ask for more money. Um, I think it is worth discussing whether we should table this until we have a final number for design and then come back to you for full approval of that amount.

So, in any case, thank you so much. I really appreciate your time and attention. Thank you, Molly.

Anyone else before we move on from public comments? Did see a few more people walk in.

Okay. All right. So, uh thank you as always to folks who took the time uh and the courage because it's not easy to get up and speak at the podium. So, thank you all for that. Um your your comments are um are appreciated.

Uh all right. So, we will move on to item eight which is report from the superintendent.

I do have some u staffing updates to share with you. Um, we have some resignations. First is Julia Adamo, who is an FHS food service assistant. Um, second is Christine Lions, whose name is not listed in your packet, but Christine has been previously employed here in the high school as an edtech and more recently at the middle school as an edtech. Um, but is resigning as an edtech at the middle school to come back to be the JMG teacher here at the high school. And since that is a JMG hired position, that's why you have not approved that. JMG approves that, but um Christina is still with us, just in a different capacity. Um and I have some retirements to share. Nick Whitty, who is a Freeport Middle School ELA teacher, Reena Frank, who is a Freeport High School food service assistant, Carolyn Favro, who is an edtech at Mass Landing School, and Mr. Pitten at Durham Community School, has announced his retirement.

he's going off to achieve the dream that we all hope to get to someday. Um, I also wanted to talk with you about the district goal tonight um and leave room for questions about that. So, I have um something written for you about that um that I will also share with you later this evening. Um and you also have it in your packet, but we'll talk more about it when we're um meeting with just me. Um I hope you've had a chance to read this already. Um we have made steady progress toward the goal of developing a five-year strategic plan. Um, I hope and I do feel personally that the process has been comprehensive and inclusive and it has certainly been deliberate in trying to engage as many stakeholders in all of the district's towns as possible. Um, that plan is moving towards some concrete steps including um a portrait of the graduate, a mission statement, a statement of core beliefs and values which have received multiple iterations of feedback and will be coming to be presented to you soon. Um, the next part of this process is to actually start working on the plan itself. And that's something that will unfold over the rest of the winter and the spring. Um, so I'd like to leave opportunity now for people to ask questions about that.

Can you remind us when the board sees that sort of interim step before the final product comes to us for review and approval? It's within the next few meetings. I think it's either the next meeting or the one after that.

Turn your mic on.

It's within the next few meetings. I think it's either next meeting or the one after that. Okay, great. Thank you.

Other comments or questions on that in the meantime? Sounds like we'll be hearing more soon. Um I will say about uh the retirement of Principal Pittton.

um a uh committee, a hiring committee is being formed. I know an email went out to the board and community members uh for those interested in being on that committee. I know there have been um actually a really good response coming in, but you still have a few days uh before the deadline, which I believe is Friday, to get a letter of interest in to be involved in that hiring committee.

Um, so if anyone was just really really excited to be involved with that, um, uh, there are still a few days to get your name in for consideration. Um, but it sounds like we actually have, uh, quite a few people who have applied, so that's great. Um, but I just wanted to share that as well, what that process looks like. So for a principle um for for community members and new board members how that looks is um uh generally how our administrative search committees look they the position has already been posted in all of the places that principal positions are posted which Kelly could tell us I'm sure. Um but uh and so that's open through the end of the month. Um the committee will be selected I believe at the beginning of next week. uh that committee will convene for confidentiality training um and review of the application packets the first week of February. Uh and then we will have um the hiring committee will select uh candidates for first interview uh which will happen I believe the end of that week or the beginning of the next um and then there will be a second interview process uh and uh assuming we have a successful candidate that the committee and superintendent want to bring to the board uh it would come to the board for approval in February.

I'm not sure exactly which one it would be because of the vacation week in there, but um we're we're looking to have this wrapped up before the break.

We're hoping to have this wrapped up before the break. Lord willing and the don't rise.

Give that some thought. Um um I hear you, Tom. I'm I'm there with you. Yeah, sounds like a literary reference I don't get. Um, so, uh, I just wanted to share kind of what that process looks like, um, for folks who may or may not have been involved in in previous hiring committees. So, um, all right. So, from there, we will move on to, uh, item nine, which is the administrator reports, and we are starting off with the 2627 Freeport High School program of studies with principal Gulo. I do have to say I did a bit of a double check.

No, don't stop coming. I was just filling time while you walked up. Um, did a bit of a double take when I said you were excited to welcome and I heard them mention the class or Moon mentioned the class of 2030.

What?

I was waiting for that reaction. I was like, "Yeah." Can you do anything about that? Is there a way to fix that kid?

I wrote that a bunch of times today. Oh, good luck to you guys.

Well, good evening everybody. I'm Jen Gul, the principal from the high school.

I have this wonderful cold that everybody has had and I've escaped it until now. So, I apologize for my voice tonight, but hopefully you can hear and understand me. So, yes, class of 2030. I wrote that about 10 times today as we prepped for this um family event. We're really excited for the family event, too. We made some changes last year to make it more of a celebration. lots of students um current students that come um and so it's really great. We have music in the hallways. The families get to tour the building. We have um tables with clubs and sports and organizations and the teachers and the guidance counselors. And so yes, I wrote 2030 a bunch of times. It was like we are really there. Um, so I'm pleased to uh share some information about our program of studies for next year. For those of you who have um heard me present this before, you have a couple of documents.

One is the giant program of studies itself uh which outlines uh all of our academic programs, our grading policies u and the courses that we offer and including the course sequences. And then um you have the memo that I create each year. So it makes it a little bit easier instead of a fishing expedition to see where in fact we've made changes from year to year. Um and so what I'll do is I won't go through every single one of these changes. Uh because some of what we try to document is literally any of the edits that we make. Um what I'll go over I'm um certainly able to answer any questions about this document but I'll go over the major changes that are coming for next year. I will start by saying that there are some parts um we are early in our timeline of some of the surrounding high schools to present our program of studies. We do that because we ho host a curriculum fair at the end of January which is like a career fair or a college fair except it's um all of our own staff in the gym and each table uh has representatives from every department and the grades come down one at a time from the bleachers and are able to find out about the classes that we offer and meet teachers and answer uh excuse me ask any questions. And so we've backed this process up. so that I can share this with you so that that curriculum fair can happen and then we start course registration very very quickly. So um some of the uh information from region 10 is not complete yet. That was the point of me saying our our timeline um they are still uh discussing some things like the credits assigned to the courses. there are some new courses. Uh and so that information will be updated. Um I'll share it with the superintendent and um some of you who are in communication with the region 10 uh might know some of those changes as well. But anything that's added to this I'll share with the superintendent who can share with the board.

Um, so, um, one thing that you'll notice, uh, on page 15, this has gotten a little bit more complicated for students and parents and maybe the principal to follow, is that, um, the our school counselors used to have a set group of the alphabet uh, with which they worked. The trouble with that is that um, it was very imbalanced from year to year. So there's not the same number of students from last names A to H each year. And so we have altered that from year to year. It's a little bit confusing uh if you're looking at the whole school, but the guidance counselors work really hard to make sure each class knows who their counselor is.

Um but you'll see that there's a breakdown by grade that it shifts um from grade to grade. Um on page 17, one shift that we made this year uh that has been uh um somewhat of a project for us that we are happy about is that we used to offer a class here for many many years since I've uh been here called and before my time called learning lab which learning lab was the smallest study hall that we offered. um we had some challenges with turnover in that position and so the learning lab situation wasn't as strong as it had been when I arrived here at Freeport in 2015 2016 those school years. So we've ch we also along with the change of that course. This is the first year that our teachers shifted to teaching five classes instead of six which I shared with the board at the end of last year.

We worked really hard with um Paula Roberts and our department chairs and it's in line with the vast majority of the schools around us that teachers teach five classes and their sixth class um is a supervision duty or what we now call Falcon Lab. And so Falcon Lab is led by a classroom teacher predominantly. It's an English, math or a science teacher. Um, we keep this section small and it is a really small and focused study hall uh that where students are placed in there for half of a block. And so we're capping those at seven which means that those students get a ton of individual support. But what's wonderful is because we have been able to schedule this every block of both color days. We started the year with 119 students in one of these labs which is great. I don't think the students think it's great. Um, but because they have to have a 76 or higher in every class to be able to have the opportunity to leave that uh that se um support class and go into a general study hall. What has been great to see is that there are some students who have earned 76 or higher in all of their classes and they have chosen to stay because they know that that class is very helpful. It's small, it's focused, it's short, it's 40 minutes, and they're cranking work out, and we're really proud of them for doing that. So, we're continuing with that. As Moon shared, we're excited, not well, lots of us are not excited for midterms. Some of us are excited to see the new semester come.

Um, and so the new semester starts on Monday, January 26th. we look at grades very closely and see who needs to continue in these labs and who needs to be placed in there and who has the opportunity to leave. Um so we're really excited about that. Um with the overall goal of seeing a higher percentage of our students with a 76 or higher in all of their classes which is you know midc range. Um so uh so that is information that's uh in there as well on page se 17 and page 18. Um one revision on page 21 is um that needed to be added in there. That's an error is that you'll see um with the grading information about the honors band. Uh again, something that we proposed to the board last spring was to shift to weighted weighted and unweed GPA on students transcripts. This was something largely that students really wanted. Um and that is in line with schools around us. Um, and so there all that's missing in there is that it needs to say um that the range for sumakum laad is 92.5 to 100 plus because some kids will go higher than 100. Um, they'll have above a 4. We don't really convert to a 4.0 GPA unless we need to a four-point scale unless we need to for college admissions or for scholarship because we use a 100 point scale here.

But so with the weighted GPA um and the weighted grades, it can potentially go.

We just had our student first student the other day reach um an average that's over a hundred. So just a little plus will be added in there. Um we're really excited on page 26, we've added an AP class. Um it is the only AP class that the College Board offers that's a semester course. Uh and this is called human geography. Uh and we are uh have not begun that class yet. We are actually offering it second semester this year. So that starts a week from Monday. Um and uh it's adding to our social studies. It's really uh an elective at the AP level. And so it's open to all four grade levels, which is great. Um they just have to have a teacher recommendation to get into that course. Um and students can take that in conjunction with another social studies class. Um we have um on page 36 we have made the decision to bring back a course that we called unified PE. Um, for those of you who are familiar with our unified basketball team, which is um some one of the favorite fan favorite teams at the high school, um where our students uh it's through the Special Olympics where our um students with either um uh physical or developmental disabilities are paired with uh other students to play on the team. That is the way that we run unified PE. We used to offer that class. We um stopped offering that class uh because of uh we had small numbers in our life skills program. Um our numbers have grown with students who have come in in the ninth grade. Uh and feeling like um that will be a great class to offer. And so that's offered to the whole school. Uh and we're hoping that that's going to be a popular option for for PE. Um we have um page 43. We have talked about this last year as well due to smaller class sizes. We shifted this year um that we will be offering um AP biology and AP physics on alternating years. Uh and so this is the year that um we have offered um that this is the year that we will offer coming up. Um AP biology and AP physics will be offered in 2027. We have AP physics in person right now. Um and so we have tried to advertise that to students so that they can plan their course sequence because they do that well in advance. I should add that at that curriculum fair, the students who are not on the floor visiting the tables are up in the bleachers working on their four-year plan. They come through this document. They're supposed to um come through this document. We have adults in the bleachers making sure that they are doing that and looking at this and then they have their own document. Um and so we let parents know and encourage them to ask their student about their four-year planner. Their counselor has a copy of it and they have a copy of it.

it's digital and they can um make out a a plan for where they're hoping to take classes. And so we make sure that they know that AP physics and AP biology are every other year. And we're hoping we see enrollment grow in both of those classes so that kids aren't competing between those two classes which was resulting in low enrollment.

Um we have uh a new elective this year um and it was called main field studies.

However, we also have another class if you remember me presenting this that is called the Gulf of Maine Field Studies.

Um, so that was confusing. Um, and so we have changed the name of that course to mapping. Um, and that's um, the exploration of all different types of scientific mapping. Um, and so content will be the same. We've just changed the name of that so that it's clear. Um we were um really happy to some of the um theater classes have been renamed and this year as you know we had a shift in our theater teacher um and we had low enrollment with a course uh before prior to his arrival and then he uh decided to start a course that's called theatrical makeup excuse me theatrical makeup um which is just learning another part of the um the element of leader. And so that's been a popular course already. We have a section right now. Um and um we're excited to put that into the program of studies and offer that in the coming school year.

Um we uh have removed our course on page 59 and 60 video production. Uh we again we had low enrollment in that course and at the same time we have another course that's called modern journalism and modern journalism is the class that runs our Falcon outlet website to give a little shout out to that website. Um and that's where we live stream our events um games and um events that happen at the high school. It's where students are writing articles all different medium and so a lot of the elements um were uh repeated in those two courses and so we have shifted to we will continue to offer modern journalism so they'll be exploring those pieces of um of video production in that um our description of May term we updated the description there May term um again I've shared this in the past this is the program for our seniors if they choose not to do a senior project.

Uh, and students decide that for all different reasons. Uh, the vast majority of our students, our seniors, do a senior project. And we're so proud of that program. And the numbers have increased from year to year. Last year, I believe it was nine students out of over 150 who did not do a senior project. And sometimes it's a good decision for them. They have a lot of AP classes and the tests are at the same time as senior project. And so May term is a I would say uh the easiest way to explain it. It it has morphed over the last three years and it is a smaller less detailed version of a senior project that is here in the building that's guided by our staff versus senior project tends to be completely independent with an outside advisor and an inside advisor check-ins and guidance and things like that. But the senior projects make their own schedule. May term is appropriate for students who might need our help in scheduling their time and still want to do a project that is connected to something that they're passionate about. So um two years ago when we started mterm the reason for it was so that students were not sitting in a class if they were the only student who chose not to do a senior project and there was now one student left and the the teacher is adjusting content and and it was a challenging factor if they had more than one class like that. It was not a very engaging way for them to spend their last month of high school.

we shifted to May term being standalone classes and there were some challenges due uh due to scheduling again with region 10 and things like that. So we feel like this is a semi-independent project where they're still doing something that integrates all the skills and the um that they've gained in Freeport High School and their interests but a lot more staff guidance and they're here in the building with us.

Um and then um as I said the region 10 uh I'll share updates as we get those as um uh a lot of that is accurate as is um but there is some new um programming and some changes to credit information or the descriptions of the programs and we'll update that. Um on page 78 we have our club list which is everchanging.

This is the most updated version. Um but one thing that we are um very pleased about is that you've heard about from our student leaders is that we have added another leadership opportunity. We have what we call student advisory leaders. So we have 40 advisories, 10 per grade level here. Um and each advisory has either one or two leaders that plan what uh the events are that the advisory does either by grade level or for the whole school. And we now have a group of leaders of those leaders. So they are called the student advisory leader officers. Um and what's great about that group is that they are now meeting with another group that we created that's called the student coalition which is representatives from uh student council, student leadership committee and the student advisory officers. And they meet together once a month to talk about what each other's teams are doing and how to support that work. So they actually just met yesterday. That was their monthly meeting. Um and so it's a great way for building leadership but also supporting the initiatives that each team um is working on. Um and those are the major changes that are this year. Oh, I'm sorry. I actually missed one. Um that is a really important one. If you could go backwards to page 51.

Um we this is probably the most significant change to our course offerings. Um what we have decided to offer is a course called fundamentals of music. So right now what we have uh it's almost like an overabundance of choices for our performing arts. Um and what that can result in sometimes is very very small sections and also um uh a huge scale of students background information and skills coming into that class. So for example, there are some students who are entering our intro to guitar class and they already know how to read music because they took intro to drums. Um some kids who have never ever played an instrument before are in there with somebody who has played for a long time. Um what I met with um some of our um 6 through 12 uh performing arts teachers to talk about how do we maintain the numbers in band and chorus.

We've seen incredible growth at the middle school level in both band and chorus and want to maintain that in the high school while still offering um great things and so we were seeing competition there. So a student might choose intro to guitar instead of band when they've been committed to band and we really want to help students stick with that if they can. Of course they have the choice to leave. Um but I think we have um some fantastic teachers here and really hope that they'll take on that um that challenge to stay in band.

So we have come up with this idea that we're going to try out that's called fundamentals of music which is similar to our art offering which is called foundations of art. And so foundations of art, the expectation is that the vast majority of our nth graders, if they are choosing uh a visual art class, then they are choosing fundamentals, some a very small number, also go into photography. And so we then know that there are foundational skills that every student will have as they travel up into the visual art classes. And that's the same concept that we're trying to do for fundamentals of music. So this the choices for our ninth graders will be chorus band or fundamentals of music.

Students in course and band could also take fundamentals of music. And um I think this sounds pretty awesome. It is going to be a little bit of guitar, drums, um piano and music technology which is like garage band on their computer. So then we have a second level in all of those classes. So once a student has taken fundamentals of music then they'll be able to go into guitar one, piano one um music tech uh and drums and so then the teachers will know that at least there is a basis of skill.

Everybody will be able to read music.

Everybody will have some sort of exposure to um to those courses. We also will as we do in many places um have the opportunity for exceptions. So if a student has played it uh guitar for a long long time and really wants to be in guitar one then that will be a meeting between the teacher and me and that student in order to place them in the right place. So, we're really excited about that class. Um, and see how that impacts. I would anticipate that what's going to happen is we'll see the numbers dis decrease in those discrete classes like guitar one and piano one in this first year and then the fundamentals classes will be bigger and then we'll see those upper levels grow. We're seeing that a little bit in foundations of art as we are really funneling our ninth graders to that class. I say nth graders but it can be anybody who takes this class. Um, some students choose to wait to take their visual and performing arts class until their senior year. And so those are mixed grade levels, but that's the information that we'll share with our our nth grade families as our incoming nth grade families.

So if um that is the vast majority of this information, if there's any questions that I can answer.

Thank you, Jen. I think your voice actually got better throughout.

I think so. I was like, I'll just cough on the way home. It's good.

I'm curious um with this being the first year of the alternating between AP Physics and AP Bio, did you see that increase in the AP Physics enrollment without the AP Bio on the schedule this year?

Uh slightly. Some students um didn't feel like they needed to choose between, but I think um most of our students take honors biology as a sophomore. And so if they're interested because there is some there are some students that there's a distinct difference like there's AP kids who for biology who have no interest in taking physics and so those students who were in honors biology last year now will have the opportunity to take AP biology as a senior. So that was on purpose. Um there isn't an intro physics class. That is actually that is their first physics class if they choose to teach AP. And so what I'm actually hoping is that we see the difference next year that when we offer AP biology that we will see the numbers from the 10th grade class from um that grow because they would know last year that they could take that class next year. Gotcha. Thank you.

And um asking for a frienddaughter um is the first day next of the second semester a white day or a maroon day? I can tell you that um very quickly because it's on my fine I'll find it on my desktop. It it used to always always always be maroon uh but we are completely in line with the three the four schools with region 10 and Brunswick and Mount Aerat now. So that's not necessarily the case. It is a white day. White day.

Moon you can advertise that is a white day. And the students all have they have a new student Google classroom like we have a staff Google classroom and that color calendar is in there and if they joined it which the vast majority of our students have um then they can find that color color calendar for the whole year.

It doesn't change with weather. It it stays the same.

I will encourage her to use that resource. I can resend that as well.

Anna, thank you Jen. Um, I have younger kids, so this was my first time seeing the high school program of studies, and I was blown away. I was just like, "Oh my gosh, I had no idea there were so many offerings, and yeah, I was just really impressed." Um, the one thing that did stand out was just because we recently had that presentation on um, AI and what are we going to do about that? And I did I was just thinking how are you thinking about um adding in potentially a course offering or something in the curriculum about kids learning about AI and those kinds of changes.

It's a great question because I think it depends. Um, first of all, AI is everywhere right now and so every teacher is addressing it whether they're addressing it how you use it or when not to use it. Um, and some of our courses like our STEM courses have used it for a long time. Um, and so it really we we have not discussed a standalone class.

Um but we have discussed policies or procedures in each class to really help students understand when is it a tool and and when is it not appropriate to use it. Um and so I think we have to talk as a team about where we would have discrete lessons. Sometimes we've done that in advisory because we're lucky to have advisory every day. We have 45 minutes of advisory. And so there are times when we decide that we are going to hold a whole class. Typically our advisory is used for club meetings and callbacks, but there's often times when we say everybody's staying in their own advisory or we have certain grade levels come down to the um to the FPAC for an assembly. So we haven't discussed in detail how we do that, but I think right now um for our high schoolers, it's it's at the tip of their fingers everywhere.

And so it's constant conversations about um when they can and can't use it, when they should and should not use it. And I think it's an everchanging conversation about how we support that.

But I think that's a further discussion about but we have not proposed it as a standalone course.

Is there consistency across even the um the departments around that? Like could you have a an English teacher who says you will not use it and then another English teacher who says well it's okay to use it in this scenario in this purpose like is it literally class by class is it department by department it it is um the conversations I think departments are fairly aligned but departmentto department is significantly different um you know how students are using AI in the STEM class to program a robot is very different than the concern that students are using AI not as a tool but as a replacement for their own learning and their own writing which is when it's never appropriate you know um and is plagiarism and talking about that and so it depends on the assignment and where they're where they're able to use it and when they're able to use it I think a lot of times for assessments we are when it's um individual thought especially for a written response. We're seeing more and more on paper and so that uh and trying to figure out when um students can use it as a study tool and you know if they're coding data for something. We in the student leadership team have been using things to code data for the last five years and so it it is really challenging to keep up with the changes while also helping students understand where it's appropriate and and where it's not. But I would say that these conversations are ongoing. I think lots of people have different opinions and feelings about it. Um and uh different teachers are at different skill levels. So um you know for example we had um a presentation to the ELA department two years ago about they actually presented to the administrative team um to learn how to use it uh in the planning end and as a a resource for for um sharing that with students. And so there are some things that they you would think that the ELA teachers are the ones who are just paper and pencil but there are some things that they are using as a tool um that they have learned from these workshops and so I think that's a big part of it of the speed with which it's changing and the professional development um is is vastly different from person to person and that's another piece for us to figure Thank you, Jen. Um, I recently went on an education day um through the district on Wabanaki studies and I was wondering how are we ensuring that the Wabanaki pieces are being met if they're choosing their courses.

So, every student in the high school is required to take American history. Um, so that's actually a a graduation requirement. And so that's where there are some courses, global studies is another one required for every nth grader. Um, and then the two sophomore classes um, which don't tend to focus on the Wabanaki um, history or culture is modern world conflict and American government. And so um, those are classes that we make sure every single student has. The only difference would be um that some students take AP US history instead of American history. Um and so that's where that that content is embedded.

Thank you.

Um this has come up in the past before too about the personal finance class. uh and wondering if I guess with the math electives or that class in particular like what it would take to make that a required class. And I say that um not only because I think that would be a nice thing to have required, but because we also received a lot of feedback in the portrait of a graduate um community feedback um about the desire to see our students have be future ready and have real world re um real world relevant curriculum.

Um, so I'm wondering if you can share more about when it's decided that it's required versus an elective and any if there are any new thoughts on that class in particular.

Um, we have not talked about personal finance being uh a required class. I agree with you that I think it's great skills. Um, I think there are additional math classes that offer some really good opportunities. We have quantitative reasoning which is also our dual enrollment class with SMCC. So they get college credit for that. Um and quantitative reasoning has a intimidating name, but it's great content in that class. Um and so a lot of that is very relevant skills. Um many of our students get their math credit through region 10. Um so then that would not be feasible in their schedule.

Region 10 is also considering um possibly partnering with uh CMCC for a technical math class, which would be fantastic. It's really about figuring out the logistics and things like that.

Um, but to to require any class um would right right now personal finance is a an option for an elective or for students fourth math. Um, but it's a it's a small very small percentage of the school that chooses that. Um, and one reason would be students don't have space in their schedule to take that or they've chosen to take another class. Um, we have a new elective this year that kids have loved that's called business math. Um, and so they're trying to hit me up for some money so that they can, you know, start their businesses. But, uh, one of which, which which I fully support, but I'm asking lots and lots of questions of their business plan. Uh, they're making t-shirts and, um, talking about a school store and things like that. So, I think there's other ways that we have done that. Um we are very cautious about what would be a required course because what that means to students schedules as soon as we require that then that's a significant impact to the entire matrix of the schedule uh in saying that all students must take that no matter what and it would require an intense amount of staffing because you'd have to have enough sections for um every student to take it and then figure out what grade level it is. So, I think it's just a constant conversation about what's I, you know, I think it's there's lots of places in our um course offerings that I think are content that's relevant and that's um related to to necessary skills in life, not just personal finance, but I think personal finance is is um a great course. There's other courses like um the graduation requirement from the state is that everyone takes a semester of health which is another important one. So that one we ensure that everybody takes. Um but I think if you're speaking in terms of those specific personal finance skills, you know, the irony is that our highest achieving math students don't take that class. So they don't have those specific skills, right? they can do some incredible calculations in AP Calculus BC and and talk about linear algebra, but they might not be able to balance the checkbook. And I, you know, I think that's that's one of those challenges in figuring out what's going to fit, what's reasonable, and where do kids find these real life um connections.

When I think about um advisory, right? I mean, I wonder if there's a way. I mean, you guys are building sort of content for the advisory. I mean, doesn't maybe it's not a full semester class, but maybe there's, you know, a couple of, you know, targeted lessons to your point of I mean, people don't balance their checkbook anymore. You don't need to um says the banker. um you know with online banking but um but yeah like maybe there's a way because I I think you know it's a great thought that everyone should take personal finance um but the ramifications you know the sort of the unintended consequences of of making another requirement like you said it prevents a lot of other things so um you know maybe there's other ways similar to the AI like how do we weave those skills into other places maybe I don't know I I think it's covered in JMG too.

U what percentage of kids tend to take a JMG class?

Um currently we have four sections of JMG right now. Um and the sections run between 10 to 15 students. So it differs from year to year, but it's a it's a smaller percentage of our our overall population. But the students who are in JMG and stay in JMG, they have some component of personal finance four years in a row. So those students hopefully are are wellversed in that but uh but that's a smaller total population less than 100 students.

So I know one of the things um a decision for the high school is not doing class rank.

Um and so we don't have a validictorian, we don't have those things. Um, as I have a kid who's, you know, moving into like college thinking process, like what what do we encourage them to do when they're asked those types of questions like, you know, do you have class rank?

No. Okay. What percentage of your class are you, you know, do you think you're in? My kid literally went through the yearbook and was like, probably higher than that, probably lower than that kid, probably. I mean, literally like, what are they supposed to do with when it's just not an option? We don't calculate that. So what we do calculate which is in the program of studies is those honor bands. So, kum laad magna kum laad sumakum laad and so even though we we don't publish and we feel very strongly about that the guidance counselors presented that all of the facts of why we don't do class rank um but they can say 10% of this class was in the magna cumlude band or 30% of the class is in so they should go to their types of questions yes because they wouldn't know it themselves um but typically if A if a college asks us if we do class rank and we say no, then they because they get our school profile which is at the beginning of this and so that is the school profile goes along with every student's transcript to tell a story about our our school and um and hopefully they see from there that we don't. And it was interesting I I um from my own college get get you know all the flyers in the mail for to donate money and um this time it's shared a percentage and it said now it's at 30% of schools that don't share a class rank um of the students who applied last year to that university. So I think schools are paying attention colleges and universities are paying attention to that too. But hopefully when they know that we are not a school that does that, you know, um then then our profile will tell that story.

Yeah. I mean it obviously should not find college, but like summer programs that that's a question they ask that's on the application.

You have to guess. You have to guess.

Yeah. So that students could talk to their counselor to say is there is there a guesstimate of how much of the percentage of students fall in that?

Okay.

Um, and so this year is the first year with the weighted GPA. Yes.

Last year did not have it. So we don't know how that sort of went with the colleges yet because they haven't done it yet. Correct. Okay.

So I'll remember that question maybe next year.

Um, yeah. Notice that the cumloud numbers on page 21 are a little bit different than those on page eight.

So, I don't know if if they just haven't been updated or if they're if they were just being rounded but not 100% accurately um under the grading scale.

But Michelle just told us that we don't need to balance our checkbooks. So that sort of stuff I don't think that stuff you pick the higher one what whatever one.

And so if that hasn't been updated then we'll make sure that those match for sure. Um and so I think that that might have just been a miss when we were making this um when we were adding the edits in here. That also needs that plus by the hundred to make sure that that's in there as well.

It also has this current school year's date on the top. Oh, thank you. Page seven. Okay. That could be an error in where I put this into there.

Apologies for that.

Uh, no. I think actually it's supposed to be that the 2025. Are you saying the class of 2025?

Because that's the last information we have data for. Yeah. For their SAT scores. And oh, I'm sorry, Cara. Are you talking about at the top of page seven?

Yeah. So, this is this is the information about our current year. So, that I'm sorry. I thought you meant the date below that. Um, so that is that is correct. It's the profile of our current year.

Okay. Um, just one more question about technology.

Be with the cell phone ban coming up for next year. Do you feel like the um proposed program offers the space for discussing with students about you know why the cell phone ban, social media addiction just kind of fully digital literacy? Is that also embedded in um the advisory period? So that would be yeah advisory is where we talk about like any of our SEAL topics when we are talking about um whole school events or things like that.

So um it's less common that we would do a le a lesson kind of what we were talking about personal finance much more common that we would have um as Moon described we did the how to help a friend uh assembly with um grades 9 through 11. We had a mental health panel with college representatives for grade 12. Um and so that's where um that either would happen in their own advisory which like I said there's 10 per grade level or um sometimes we combine two or three advisories, sometimes we have one grade level in a meeting and sometimes we have multiple grade levels in a meeting. So we decide what's the topic and what's the best venue. But that would be the the the forum that we would use.

You have another one.

Two really little nitpicky things. Um Tom's name needs to be needs to replace. Okay.

That's not a nitpicky one.

I don't know. I don't I don't I don't think we're there yet.

Fixed or not, but I just wanted to say that instead of this is the most helpful thing is the more eyes on this document because when we look at it a thousand times.

Um thank you. Sure. Um, and then on page 25, I had to look up what CP stands for.

It's college prep, right?

So, I don't know if that's spelled out anywhere else. I see that AP is spelled out as advanced placement. Um, and honors is is also talked about in there.

But I just wondered if if it well, first of all, just saying what college what CP stands for, but if there's any benefit to kind of spelling out the difference between college prep, honors, and advanced placement.

Sure, that's helpful because I and I can search the document to see if we explain that anywhere. I don't know offhand if we say that before page 25 of what CP is, but um certainly we can clarify um that that term because it's used a lot.

So it would be helpful and that is why we will never allow director Kaini to be leaving the policy committee.

Any other questions? How you feeling about it, Moon? Good.

He's like, I've been just writing down the classes I'm taking next year. Great. Thank you so much.

All right. Uh so we will move on to item 9B which is the report of early childhood task force.

Well hi everybody. So this is going to look different than I thought it was going to look even yesterday. Um I am ultimately my message here today is hopeful. Um, but as I've emailed you, we discovered an error in a spreadsheet that the state had given for not only to us, but to all districts that were looking to either join cohorts three or four. And when I say we discovered it, it was not I, it was actually Kelly who discovered this error on behalf of all school districts. Um, but you know, the way that this process had played out, you do have a a a slideshow in your packet, which I'm going to, you know, I'm not going to show the slideshow tonight, but you can obviously look at it. Where these errors affect the slideshow really is in the middle when it talks about what staffing we would be requesting to join cohort 3.

Um, I do want to say at the present moment I am still feeling that moving toward joining cohort 3 is our best option, but I don't want to have you vote on it until I have accurate information. And so, luckily, we have caught this before we've a made a commitment and b we still have time before any deadlines that the state is imposing, especially since yesterday when I spoke to them with some degree of constrnation about this error. They were I I have to say, you know, the the the folks at the DOE, it the DOE is is a bureaucracy, but it's also full of human beings. And they recognized the error right away. They were really mortified about it. They were deeply apologetic. I know that tomorrow I'm going to be seeing Megan Welter who's the deputy commissioner um at the winter convocation in Portland and I at this point I think they really want to bend over backwards to make this go well for us and you know they're aware that I had said you know I'm supposed we've already gone public with this information and I'm supposed to ask a board to vote on it tomorrow night. um they they're aware that this is super awkward. But um if I can put this in in terms that will be understandable to people who know even less of the lingo than I do, it's that they sent a spreadsheet that was supposed to calculate the way that we would be reimbursed. And they did this back in the fall when we were putting the task force together and trying to figure out what our recommendation would be. and we had them look at it as well. We double and triple checked it. Um, none of us knew that this error was in their formula. And when it gave us an amount of money that we thought we would have to work with, we thought, okay, well, we can ask for all the things we need, not just to take on four year olds next year, but really it's a what we're going to be asking and promising to do is take on foury olds next year and three year olds the year after that. So, our original thinking is, well, it doesn't it makes the most sense to build the architecture for the whole program. we want to put together, not patch it together one year at a time. So the numbers that you see in this slideshow reflect what we were hoping would accomplish that. What we're told now is that we probably have to rethink that.

Um I don't have the exact figure that we will have to work with yet. I should forth with very soon. Um we've had um meetings yesterday, meetings today. We have more meetings tomorrow. Um I know that they want to get this right. So what I'm asking tonight is um well I will talk a little bit more about what I was going to propose um because I don't see any reason to keep everybody in the dark about the big picture and then just ask that we hit pause a little bit until I can bring you back accurate numbers to to make an informed decision. So what the task force had discussed and several of us here were on that task force so please feel free to chime in was we're not China no so the overall picture is and what has not changed is that we have a law that by 2028 we have to take on responsibility for three uh special education for three and four year olds.

So no matter what by 2028 we have to get to that point and there have been asurances from the state that money that has been currently going to support those services through CDS will come to us. Um and the state has also assured us that they will continue to meet 100% of the demonstrated need. Now I will say there in lie many subjective conversations but what is the actual need to build such a program and many of us sitting here would argue it isn't just what shows up in numbers when you say you have x number of kids with IEPs that translates to x number of speech language pathologists because this is already chewing up my time and Kelly's time and we've hired a consultant to do it and Alicia's time and Erica it's it's already costing districts money. Um but we h we don't actually have firm criteria from the state about what reasonable and necessary expenses will be. That is this discussion that we have with them about here's what we think we need. What will you pay for? Um so the decision to join cohort three which was universally endorsed by the task force was largely driven by the fact that we have to do this by 2028.

And it makes sense to try to step into it over two years with four year olds first and then three year olds rather than do it all at once and postpone. And there are other factors that play into that as well, like the fact that if we step into it early, we have a better chance at hiring the necessary staff we would need to be able to support this and that's a huge factor. So there are really strong arguments to try to step into it. Now um then the second part of this that the task force decided was how we should step into it. So, what does it look like if we assume responsibility for special education for four year olds next year?

Here are some things that have not changed despite the new news I have. We already have an existing prek program.

In that existing prek program, we are already serving 75% roughly of the students who um of the four-year-olds in our district that have IEPs.

There are and that's 15 kids. That's with this year's four-y olds. There are five more four-year-olds identified in our district right now who get services through CDS that we are not serving and that's what we would have to add basically to the number of kids we're serving in the future. So that's a strength upon which to build. We already have most of the architecture in place and for that reason it still really bears consideration for us to try to step into this early. What we've then had to fig figure out is what will we need to add to serve the rest of those kids. Um and as I said to add three-year-olds the year after that.

Um and I feel like I'm missing something.

Oh, I am missing something. The other DS uh decision that the task force had endorsed was that if we step into foury olds next year, how should we deliver those services to them? And there was strong um endorsement of the idea that our way to get services to those kids is through our existing prek program as opposed to having our people go out to local daycarees where four-year-olds are that our offer of FAPE would be in our own program. And there are many benefits to that. Largely, it's better for the kids to be receiving the services in our programs. but it's also cheaper and easier because we're not sending our people out of the community paying for transportation etc. So that is a broad brush of the what we were um going to ask for you tonight and the only piece of that has now been thrown into the works because of the state's error is exactly what kind of funding they will kick to us to support it. Um team am I missing anything big?

Uh the only thing I would say um kind of two things that just popped into my mind that might be worth sharing. Um I I think the uh the focus on the fact that we're already serving a large portion of those kids is is really important, right? Um but I will say that it's not as simple by stepping into this as simply adding those five other kids to get them the services in the classroom. There are other components that stepping into cohort 3 includes which including writing the IEPs which currently CDS is responsible even the kids we serve we don't have to take that piece on for them. CDS is currently still responsible for that. So I mean that's kind of that um while we're providing the in-classroom services for those kids sort of the uh the infrastructure around how do we support the plans and the management that is really where um the uh the staffing need would come from to I mean we may need to add additional speech pathologists depending on the size of the program and those sort of things but um more uh systemic support from a staffing standpoint. point of the whole program.

Um, and that's really where the question I think is going to come into play on the on the um the funding from the state on what they would support versus what we feel like we would need to do a good job at it. Um, you know, honestly, the the funding information that we had been given um looked very much like a no-brainer of like why wouldn't we do this, right? I mean, the funding was coming from the state. We knew we could deliver the services. um we get to the staffing quicker um you know before maybe some other districts are are on board. Um it it made a ton of sense and I still think it probably is going to make a ton of sense to do this for a lot of other reasons. Um but the funding made it like why wouldn't we do this? Um which is probably why they had to fix that that formula. Um and so that's one piece uh sort of the infrastructure piece from a systemic level and then the other piece around delivery of services and in doing it in the district uh in district in our schools as opposed to going out which the state would allow us to do if we said hey we want to go out to the daycarees and provide the services instead of having them in our schools. We could do that. We didn't feel like that was the best approach. um we would keep you know the prek programs in all of the schools. But the one piece that we did um include in the funding uh in our plan was a new special education classroom, one classroom in the district for um kids that had needs that couldn't be met um in all three schools uh existing prek programs. So, so, so maybe a higher level of need um and having all those kids in in one classroom. So, the the proposal here includes the addition of that classroom. So, that's which would mean that otherwise we'd have to send those kids out, right? So, once we Yeah. Once we take on sort of the ownership of this program, those kids either need to be if we're doing FAPE in the schools, they either need to be somewhere in our schools getting those services or similar to other students at other age levels, we would have an outofd district placement.

Um, which we prefer to keep all of our kids in house if we can meet their needs. Um, and it tends to be a more cost-effective way to do it. Valerie, I'm not sure if this is a question or statement because it's finances. Um the state also if we join cohort three has some funds available for us to outfit that special room. Is that correct?

Still okay. It was a statement. It was a statement.

Now it's a question. Everything's a question.

The room itself we have to provide. But any kind of special equipment that would populate that room because we're in three and not four, right, would be partially to possibly mostly funded by the state.

Yeah. Our hope is that um and I don't even think just that special ed classroom, but like any of the of the the classrooms that are might need additional materials, support, uh desks, chairs, I don't know, little little people things. Um, yeah, there is there there is there was uh a pool of funding um to help defer some of those costs as a incentive to get on board sooner.

I'm I'm looking at Ted to make sure he's not shaking his head vehemently. No, which he's not. So, I think I'm okay.

Chris.

Um, okay. So, we said we're we're currently serving 15, but we're serving that with three positions.

Uh, and we're asking three for eight more positions.

Three three of which it says screening that CDS is performing that would now transfer to us. So, all the students would have to be screened as well.

So, I I would I would imagine that would be assistant director and office support.

Yeah. The biggest things that would be new are the early childhood director, which we'd like to frame as an assistant special education director, um, office support for the reasons Michelle was talking about, transportation coordinator, um, IEP coordinator, IEPs, uh, writing all the IEPs, doing all the written notices, etc.

um some edteexs, social worker um and in large part for the other things we would be stretching staff that we already have.

Okay. So just trying to understand that we're serving 15 with three and then yes we have office burden but if we take out our assistant director as well as our office support which is two positions we're asking for six more for five. No, but really it's not five. It's five plus 20 in theory. Three-year-olds.

It it is. And yes, we were hoping that we could build this with the three-year-olds that were also agreeing to take on just the year after that in mind.

Okay. And do we have any idea on the classroom costs? Because that wasn't in I see we have other costs kind of broken down in here, but as far as like costs to like retrofit classrooms, you mean?

Yes, correct. So that's a there's a separate pot of money which is what Valerie was just mentioning that part of the incentive to join an earlier cohort is that more of this special money to help retrofit classrooms is available.

But do we have an idea on what that might end up being?

We did a facilities there's a certain amount of like wanting to kind of understand what we're getting from the state for this and and that too.

Oh, believe me. Yeah, I know. We did a facilities tour with what was her name?

Ly. Yes. So that was back in in the fall and we went through all of our prek classrooms and she identified all she made a list of things that she thought we could um justify getting funding for or just being given. Um and it was pretty extensive. So the entire proposition and I wish I had a better answer than this. It's just the answer that the state has given. we don't have a firm answer from them. We have asurances from them and that is really difficult to work with.

I think it's also important to note that um our experts said that this is a relatively small um IEP group this year and that fluctuates from year to year and also because we're now going to be handling the screening ourselves and screening all kids, it's likely we'll identify more earlier. So I think we were more conservative on adding more staff knowing all of these pieces.

um to try to get ahead of the curve. That's very true.

So, we may need to make an adjustment on our ask. I am confident that we can still do this. It may just not be the way that we have originally talked about it. And I I want to make sure that you vote on what we've thoroughly talked about a benefit. Um this does come to mind.

Many other school districts that have already adopted this are seeing the benefits of early intervention for kids, which is huge. And it's resulting in um increased, you know, or I should say decreased negative behaviors. It's resulting in students being able to be dismissed from special education at a much earlier age. And the payoff is down the line.

And did they give you an estimate about when they might have their numbers fixed so that we have some better data to work on? I would be s actually I'd be surprised if I didn't have more concrete information tomorrow because this was literally Kelly could probably say it explain it was literally a formula in a cell in a spreadsheet and you know it was Kelly who looked at it and thought that just doesn't seem right and you know she was right.

So, I'm I'm hearing from you that perhaps by our next board meeting, we may have enough information. I am very I'm very optimistic of that.

Um, and one of the points that I made to them was that they had given a February deadline. Well, first they gave a January 2nd deadline for us to be able to join the cohort last month. I told them, you know, we're planning to vote on this on fe on on the 14th. Can you give us some grace? And they said yes. Then literally a day or so after that, they sent a broadcast to all districts that they had extended it to early February.

And just yesterday when we talked this through, I I told them, "Well, I need to be able to have a full conversation. We may need more time than that." And they said, "It's a loose deadline, and that will be fine." They are trying to bend over backwards for us at this point, which is appropriate. Yeah.

Um, I really appreciated the slides showing the least restrictive settings and the continuum of placement options. That's really helpful visual to see. So, thank you for that. Can you remind us what the plan is? Would this be full day care 5 days a week for four-year-olds?

And then what would the three-year-old plan look like?

So, the three-year-old plan, we we don't know yet. Um, the four-year-old plan is to literally step in with our existing prek. So, it's the half-day programs that we already have with the addition of one specialurpose classroom that's a special education classroom. And in that classroom, kids could stay all day or they could be there for just the morning or just the afternoon. But if an IEP required a student to be there all day, they could be there all day.

the three-year-olds. We still have a lot of figuring out to do the four this this amount. What is attractive about this is that we really already have the architecture in place. It requires very minimal change. Um when it comes to three-year-olds, what we will be up against is we don't have any space right now. So that's that's the next task force, how to how to grapple with three-year-olds. Um, and it will also come up in my budget presentations.

Can you say more about the transportation coordinator and what the needs are around that?

Um, transportation is across the whole district. Um, an area that needs support right now. Um, the department is stretched really thinner than it should be with our existing need. And when we add in four year olds, it is very clear we're going to need extra support for the transportation coordinator for all of the kids whose IEPs require transportation.

And that's also the the driver for well, no pun intended, maybe the pun was intended, I don't know. Uh the special education ed techs with driver hours, right? So, and I think maybe that comes to Chris's point about like if we're already servicing 15 of these 20 kids, how is adding five more kids adding eight more jobs? I mean, I don't think these are all necessarily full-time equivalents, right? So, um maybe they would be, maybe they wouldn't be. Um, but I think part of it is, um, to pick up that transportation piece. Um, because if they have IEPs that state, you know, they they can't take the regular bus or they need a van or whatever. Um, we have to accommodate those.

Okay. So, when you say transportation needs, you mean aside from a bus, the school bus. Okay. Largely, it's going to be vans.

Got it. All right. Um, and yeah, my question I also had a question about FTEES. Are these FTEEs or are these not FTEES?

As written FTEES, um we can scale back on these requests and still be able to meet the need. Um what we the amount of money we thought we were getting, we thought, well, we might as well, you know, put in a robust infrastructure.

So I don't need a vote tonight. Um but I I needed to offer you this explanation and I hope at least you have sort of gotten the general scope of the work that has happened with the task force which has been really huge um and involved a lot of people and really rich discussion and I do I do believe you know that we are headed in the direction of joining this cohort um and please stay tuned for further updates.

I guess uh since we do have some time before we do have a vote um based on what you've heard tonight, does any uh are does any of the board members have um absent the funding piece um have issues sort of with the programmatic direction that is being presented? or are there additional questions that you would other than the funding that you would like to know before you had to vote on this since might as well take this advantage opportunity.

Okay, I really need to give a shout out to several people who are sitting out there. This team of people, Kelly, Elicia, Erica, and Ted have worked really hard on this.

And like Cara, who's never getting off the policy committee, Kelly is never getting off Excel duty. So, thanks, Kelly.

We thank you. And all the other districts that you figure that out for before they approve this. Thank you.

All right. So, we'll stay tuned on this.

All right. So, we do not have any uh board comment committee reports or policy review tonight. We are uh tableabling item 12 which was the vote on the early childhood um cohort 3 decision and we will move on to item 13 which is new business.

Are you doing this or is Erica doing this? The uh schedule. We have a school calendar to consider.

If you would look in your packet it's green. Erica has done the leg work on this, running it by the other districts that we partner with, especially for region 10. Um, a reminder that by statute, we can have no more than five dissimilar days from other schools that share the same tech center. So, this was crafted with that in mind.

So, usually this conversation uh centers around a few things. Uh it centers around when do they start school uh before or after Labor Day. That's usually one question. Uh the discussion around uh where the PLLD days are placed um and if there was um intention behind those other than just trying to align with the other districts. um how long the winter break is um and then um uh the early release dates.

So there is I can I'd like to provide comment on a few of those. Um we are in fact starting early.

So we have professional learning days on August 25, 26, 27. Then Friday the 28th is a day off and students are in on August 20 on August 31st.

Yeah. So Labor Day is as late as it can be next year with being the first uh being the first Monday of September. So the 7th is the latest it it can be. So makes sense that we're starting pre-Labor Day. And then we have a professional learning day on the Friday that precedes Indigenous People's Weekend, which is typical. We also have another Pday on Tuesday, November 3rd, and any of you who are very civically minded may see what that lines up with. Um, there was some very deliberate choice to have the professional learning day be on election day. um and actually to not have school on that day because that the the crossing traffic of voters here at Freeport High School, it it's really wise to try to avoid that if we can and we could. Um the holiday break in December um is not a full two weeks, but that does enable us to, if we look forward, it enables us to get out at a pretty reasonable time in June.

And a note that Junth this year is actually on a Saturday and the legal observance of Junth is then on the Friday preceding that. Um, state offices are doing that. Other districts are doing that. So that's when we really need to observe Junth.

So we couldn't just pick Monday.

Now Jenny told me that this would come up. She and I went round and round. Oh, I heard it through the wall.

Okay. Um, Chris has his hand up. Yeah.

So, we're expecting students to come back for a half day on Monday.

So, that Yes. So, the reason it looks like that is because we have never, maybe this isn't a fair statement, not had at least one snow day. So, where it currently ends as the last day is never where it actually ends as the last day.

And so, if you do like a Wednesday, it's not uncommon to have three snow days and then you're in there on a Monday. So if you plan to end on a Monday, you hope to be out by Friday is usually how it goes because there's no snow days built in. Snow days next year. No snow days next year.

My daughter, who will be a senior next year, is hoping for all the snow days because they don't have to make up snow days because they're done by then, right?

I mean, just just like just doing a cursory look at this, like I can see that we're gonna have a lot of absences on the 21st and 22nd of December. Um, yeah. I mean, it's uncom. So, I'll give you some some uh color around that piece of it, too. Um, so I think it was a little more common to have kind of the full two weeks a long time ago. I don't I can't tell you exactly the last time we had a two a full two week break, but it's probably been six or seven years since we have. Um this year it just felt like it would have been like a one day at and like no then we would have had everybody out. Um you know I I think the um the thought process and maybe Erica has some um you know some details of talking with the other districts. Um I think sometimes the the two weeks is very challenging. Um we've heard that from principles. Um the longer they're out at that break, the harder it is to get them back into the schedule. And um I I recall I don't I don't know what principal said it to us but um two weeks is is rough coming back. Um so they they often try to actually avoid that. Um the other thing we have heard in the past is like could we get rid of February break? That was we had a board member who advocated for that every year. Um could we lump you know February and April into March like college? Um I mean all interesting ideas but have never I mean particularly given um our requirement to um to stay in line with um Brunswick and uh MSAD75.

So remember we can only be five days apart but one day apart is really two days right because if we go this g day they go another day and that's two days dissimilar.

Um so it's it really requires a lot of coordinating.

Yeah. So Erica Mateo, assistant superintendent. Um, so we did, we worked together. We planned these meetings in October. We got it done in December. It was ready to go. Um, we felt pretty good about it. This was one of the easier experiences I've had with this. Um, usually when there are multiple districts working together, one district takes the lead on initiating kind of like the negotiation. Um, there wasn't a whole lot of negotiation. There is one dissimilar day um which is nowhere near the five but that is that on um election day um Brunswick is indeed having school. So which is interesting because I feel like in the past they have been the ones who have taken that as a PLLD day. Not this year. What's that?

Okay. So it's not at the middle school anymore. Okay. So that's why. So uh for folks information um panel votes at Mallet Hall. So, it's never in the school. Freeport votes here at the high school in the gym.

Um, and Durham moves around their elections just so you have to stay on top of it to know where to go. Um we generally will only hold it uh in the school for the larger elections because we have historically not closed school.

Um uh and um tried to keep it out of the school as much as possible because here at the high school you can kind of segregate it with a separate door. In Durham that's more challenging. So um so gubanatorial and presidential are at the at the school and the other ones are elsewhere. So um Um so that that makes sense on why Brunswick changed it.

Yeah. And then um no substantial push back on the alignment of professional days or um holiday breaks. Uh everybody kind of came into the conversation having looked at the year and sort of assessed it similarly with I think the rationale that Michelle has offered that like we have been very seldom have we had a two week um span in recent history. So this is not an uncommon scenario. I will say that our graduation schedules are are interestingly scattered. Um, uh, Brunswick's got, um, the 4th of June, which is wicked early. Um, and then we have, as you know, the 13th and MSAD is the 13th as well. Um, so that's a pretty big stretch of difference between some of our districts, but um, yeah, there really isn't much here. like it was relatively easy and love to keep it that way. Um, and RSU5 initiates the conversation. So, yeah, we pushed that a few years ago because we used to get this and be like, well, the other two the other two districts have already approved it, so you have no choice. So, not that we wanted to change anything, but we just wanted the opportunity if we wanted to change things.

So, I appreciate your your efforts on that. Valerie, I want to thank you for your work on this, Erica. Um I do want to say personally this school year's schedule was a burden for my family um because of the way camps work. There were no camps those two weeks leading up to school because school started so late and then there was a two week December break and both of the parents in my household work jobs that are not conducive conducive to long stretches of being off. Um it was I'm just going to say rough.

Um and I don't think we're alone in the district. Um I just being mindful that we don't all have um forgiving schedules and are still parents um is just super helpful. It was really nice when Laugh and Learn uh offered some some gap filling days um to cover those in those two weeks.

Really appreciated that for the working families. Um I think if we're going to have some challenges where we are very far off from the college schedule, who are the people that are employed at those camps and therefore not available?

Um it would be really nice if we could find a way to try to make up some of that gap for our for our working families in the district.

That is a great point. Uh and that kind of dovetales into why the early release is usually a comment because that's never a dissimilar day because it counts as a school day. Um, but there has been conversation in the past about the early release and it being challenging for parents um to um which I think is why there's probably only two in here.

Right. Um it's also challenging for transportation. Yeah. When we've got region 10 buses running, right? That kind of right. Because those are not early release days, right? So usually No.

Yeah. So, um, you know, it seems like we have in the past several years kind of settled on those two. Um, you know, provides some extra PD time for the teachers when they're already here, so it works with the contract. Um, but, you know, I I don't know about you guys, but when I was younger, like every Wednesday was an early release day, but that was a time where typically there was a parent that was able to get their kids half day every every Wednesday. I don't think that's necessarily the scenario anymore.

And um while it would be great to have more PD day for our teachers, I think it becomes super challenging for for families that way. So um I don't know if you guys talked about more or less early release days or if this you just stuck with what we had and Yeah. So um what our task is amongst the districts in region 10 is to make sure that our dissimilars are reduced, right? Um, yeah. And so there wasn't any real conversation about specifically because like you said, erd those early release days aren't going to impact the count. Right. Right. So that would be an inside job for us. Yeah. That's what I was wondering. Yeah.

Less about the other districts and more about like if you guys had had discussion about the early release and if you were satisfied with those two days, if if they were beneficial um with the B team. I don't know. We we haven't actually discussed it that extensively but but um a theme that has emerged is that the amount of time we have for PD is not sufficient.

Um and a large part of that is that it was negotiated away. Um so that has been a real crimp especially with strategic planning um to find the time to work with the staff to make that happen. So I mean I'm glad that we have them. So you're not willing to give them up?

No. But you're not advocating adding more. Um, not this year. Well, not at the moment. Well, we're we're when we approve this, it goes up on the website. So, yeah. And it's up.

It's up for the year. Yeah. Okay. Yeah. You can't change a website. Um, Jenny seems to know how.

Kelly, I will point out that this schedule is almost perfectly aligned with what we have this year with perhaps the exception of the November PLLD being on election day. So, this is almost exactly what we're we're currently doing and it seems to be working. Well, of course, because the dates are on different the vacations fall on different dates. We have a shorter um holiday vacation next year, but other than that, it's it's really similar to what we're doing this year.

All right. So, um any other comments, questions? This is something we vote on so it can go up on the website. Never to be taken down. Never to be taken down.

Um, all right. So, do I have a motion for consideration and approval for the We do this twice. Do we always do this twice? Did we do it twice? Okay.

I think maybe in the past we've um sent Cynthia back to change things. So, maybe maybe it'll be easier this time. Um, so a motion for consideration and approval for the first read of the 2627 school calendar. Steph and Cara, thank you.

Any other comments? All those in favor? Great.

Moon is also hoping for all the snow days next year.

All right. Uh so we will move on to item 13B. Um and I will get the motion on the floor and then is Glenn still here? Oh, there he is.

He didn't want to sit too long. He was moving around back there. uh he'll give us the I imagine the scoop on this. So uh do I have a motion for consideration and approval to expend up to $30,000 from the capital reserves for the variable flow device VFD for those of us in the in the business here replacement for the two stage pumps in the fpack area of Freeport High School.

Chris and Malik, thank you.

Who's talking to us? Is it you? I guess happy to answer any questions.

Well, you could start with what is a variable flow device and why are we replacing it?

So, a variable VFD for those of us in the business, a variable flow device. So, there's there's two different types.

So, you got a variable speed which you can control just the motor portion of the pump or variable flow which controls the amount of pressure in the system for a water system heating system such as like we have here at the high school. So currently up in the F-Pack in the boiler room, we have one pump fail. So that means we only have one running. So you it's a lag system. You have a primary pump, secondary pump. So when one fails, you have a secondary to keep the heat on. So we're down to that one. So this was on a additional phase project down the line. So we just took that one, moved it up where it failed, and brought it to everybody to to replace those variable flow devices. So that's why we're here to replace them.

Okay. Yeah. So, um, so we could we could fix or replace the existing one that we have, but we would essentially be looking to replace that with this higher level system a year or two down the road. So, instead of kind of taking that intermediate step while it would be somewhat cheaper to do that, we're saying we know we have to replace these anyway, so let's just take care of it this year. And the way we can accomplish that is um through the capital reserve.

And we'll also get some energy savings from that as well by upgrading to the to the new vehic.

Any questions for Glenn?

All right, we have a motion. We have a second. All those in favor? Wonderful. Thank you.

Great. Thank you. You want me to stay put?

Sure. Don't go far. All right. So we will move on to Chris and we did the Chris and Malik. Chris and Malik.

Um all right. So we will do the same. We will get the motion on the floor for item 13C. Do I have a motion for consideration and approval to expend up to $41,500 from the capital reserves for tennis court design services for the Freeport High School.

Kelly and Valerie, thank you. Um, okay. Okay, back to you. Yep. So, uh, how'd we get here? So, uh, as you you heard from our students and speakers tonight, um, in my short tenure here, that the tennis courts are in pretty rough shape. Um, I think everybody here will will agree to that if you took a look at them. Um, so we we we had several meetings and then we we put out a RFP to to have a company come in and take a look at doing an engineer design and also uh from a facility standpoint to figure out how'd we get here, what caused it to be able to be in such bad conditions. So that means we're doing some core samples and so forth.

So, we put it out to bid and the uh the company that uh was awarded it, the only one that bid was CHA, who was original company that did some design work here previously at the high school, uh was the winning bidder. So, we had a uh uh premeating, myself, uh Tom and Kelly, uh to kind of do a kickoff or what have you. Once we completed that uh meeting, we asked that same vendor to go out and take a look at it uh look at the current tennis courts uh to to determine whether or not they were safe to play. And that's how we got to where we are that they determined in their best assessment that the courts are unsafe to play based on their current condition. So, uh, what this proposal is for tonight, um, and we just brought it up at the facility finance committee meeting is for them to come in and do the core samples and also do the engineering and the design build for a post I want to make sure I get it correct here. Uh, post-tension tennis courts. So, I'm going to be upfront. I'm not a tennis guy. Never played tennis before in my life. So, I've done a lot of research on this. Um and the research generally leans towards a post-tension tennis court which is a concrete tennis court is the longevity is there for that. Um I got a brief write up. So the main difference between an asphalt and concrete tennis court lies between the flexibility cost and longevity. Asphalt is cheaper initially but cracks more easily and needs frequent repairs especially with uh freeze thaw cycles that we have here in New England. While rigid uh post-tension concrete costs more upfront, but offers superior durability, long longer life, 25 plus years versus the 10 to 15 years versus asphalt. In my research, I find that varies. So, if you look at a tennis court in Arizona, you're probably going to get a lot more longevity out of it than you do in Maine because they don't get the the frost like we do up here. Um the significantly lower long-term maintenance preventing uh from cracks common happens in asphalt both require resurfacing every five years or so. But concrete avoids uh costly crash crack repairs making the most making at the most economical over a period of time.

So that's uh when we put the proposal together that's why we put that in there just based on that research. Uh at the facility finance committee meeting, they brought up a very good point that we ought to look at what the cost scenario would be if we stuck with the asphalt side of it. Uh so I reached out to my contact with that vendor and we're going to be working on getting that number as well. Um that's why you heard tonight that the number presented may not be the exact number. It may be a little bit more since they do their cost analysis on that, but that number will get the process started because we still need to do some engineering work. we still need to do the the core sampling and the overall engineering design around it um while they're working on adding for both the post tension and the the asphalt tennis courts. So we do may we may have to come back but uh once we get that information we'll be able to Yes. So the the 415 that's being requested here um provides the engineering um the engineering design for um both a three we have we currently have three tennis courts um and so I think we heard from one of the speakers today that is uncommonly small um I had heard four was more typical sounds like maybe even five um we don't I think we can guarantee we don't have room for five but there is thought that there might be a way to sneak a fourth one in there. Um so the 415 before us tonight is the um the bid to um put together the engineering and the plans for three or four. So they would look and provide the design for both assuming they could find a way to make the fourth one fit. Correct.

um the post-tension project. Um the the other um the other component of why we uh suggested we also get the design work for the other um asphalt which is what we currently have.

um is they um is there is a significant my understanding I don't know the facts yet but we will hopefully uh difference in price between the asphalt and um and the post tension um in the short term right upfront um potentially to the tune of double we don't know maybe it's less than double but um but we won't know that until we find out it correct so um so the suggestion was Um, you know, if if it's not double and we can find the fund raise the money and find the funds to do this and do the one that's going to last 25 years and be better quality, then great. Um, if if the post and I want to call it post and beam post tension postension post tension makes it cost prohibitive based on that the other alternative might be a good option so we can get courts in in play. Um so that's kind of the the backstory behind why the 415 is for for those two options. So um three or four post tension and then um Glenn will find out the additional engineering costs to add to the scope to say okay what about three or four asphalt just so we have all the information so we can plan um and and you know come up with the where we go from here.

And the um the company who did is doing the scope they might also be who does the buildout of it or different?

No. So they they don't install um they wouldn't be similar to the track and field. They manage the process. They manage the bids. They managed the design. They were not the ones who installed. So once we decided once we got back the engineering made decisions based on what type we want, how many we want, um they would send it out to bid and then companies who specialize in the actual installation of tennis courts would be the ones who come and do the work.

Correct. Y we have a separate reserve for tennis.

We do have a separate reserve for tennis. That's a great point. Thank you for mentioning that. Um, we th the this is not a surprise that these tennis courts have needed work. We have started putting money aside every year into a reserve account to start saving for this project. Um, they deteriorated quicker than we were able to save. So, we unfortunately don't have all of it sitting in a savings account. That would be great. Um but the reason we are asking for these funds to come out of capital reserves and not the tennis reserve is because you may recall how the warrants are written each year. Um there is a vote that allows us to expend from capital reserves. We did not get that vote to expend from the tennis reserves in the current year we're in.

So we can't access that money unless we wanted to have an annual meeting of of Oh, Kelly's going to tell us how much is in there. Oh.

Um, so, um, so what I would envision going forward is, you know, funding from that tennis reserve would likely be on the warrants at this year's annual budget meeting so that we would be able to use those funds um, next year. So, currently, as of the school year that we're in with the passage of the 2526 warrant, there's about 190,000 in the tennis court reserve. And the only other thing I wanted to mention when we talk about um the project itself is there there would be a second component for CHA in addition which would be the the construction management piece of it. They would be the ones that are making sure that whoever wins the bid is installing the the to the specifications of the bid and that would be a separate contract.

but we didn't include it as part of this one because we don't even know if we're doing the project yet, right? So, we wouldn't want to include and build in a price for construction management if we don't know that we're actually doing the project. So, when when and if we come back with um you know, we decide on what what we're moving forward with and and there is funding or not funding those types of things, then we would come back for the construction management piece.

Do we know how long the asphalt has lasted for this iteration?

Uh I think I heard the mid80s was when the original uh original around that time frame, but it's been repaired several times. Several times. Yeah. Yeah. Recoated. Correct. Crack seal. Yeah.

Yeah. Well, they they've they've tried all sorts of machinations on how to keep these things alive. Yeah. Chris.

Um, first off, just thank you for the members of the public that came and talked, especially the students. That's very helpful information for us, for me at least. Um, a couple questions. one.

So, if we were to decide, let's say we were to go through this process and we were to decide that asphalt was the right way to go, have we not wasted, wasted is the wrong word, but have we forgotten that $41,500 or does that $41,500 include also the design for the asphalts?

So, it doesn't include specifically for the asphalt that that's the incremental part that that Glenn's going to come back with.

Correct. Um, but it does include the core samplings that have to be done in either case. It does include looking into uh the the space and can we fit four as opposed to three. I imagine they're still the same size whether they're asphalt. So, I think they're the fundamental design is probably the same whether it's asphalt or or post tension.

Um, but it really comes down to probably the timing and the cost of the different ways it can be built. So, it's not I would say no, it's not fully wasted. Um, I think a lot of that is going to get used in either scenario if that Okay. Do we have any idea what that breakdown is? I mean, is it possible for us to say, "Hey, CHA, we want we want you to design the space and we want to do the core samples, but don't design the the post-tension court until we get an idea of how much the asphalt court actually cost us." Um, I mean, I think it's that's it feels a little chicken in the egg because we don't know we don't know the difference in the costs. We don't know like is it double, is it 10% more? Um, I mean, I think the best road forward is is well, find out how much the additional cost is. I mean, I guess what we could do in that scenario if we wanted to, Chris, is we could find out we could table this, not vote on any of the funds tonight, find out the additional costs to add in the asphalt design. So maybe it goes from 415 to 50 or maybe it goes from 415 to 80. And then we can decide um you know do we want to get both? Do we want to choose which one? We only want asphalt. We only want post intention. We want both. Um we we could take that route. Um I just don't know. There is a very tight timeline um to try. That was another question I had is is I mean we have a spring tennis season, right? Yeah, they're out this year.

I assume there's no Yeah. So they will they will find another place for them to play this year because they have deemed the courts to be unsafe.

Gotcha. So So the when I bring up the kind of my original thought was like we've had longer discussions for less money. Let's say it's half the cost is the design, you know, half of this 415 is the design for the post tension.

That's like still $20,000, which is a fair amount of money. So, kind of understanding I mean, I feel like we're we're spending money to get quotes. Is that what we're doing to get the designs? Because you can't get a you can't maybe Glenn can speak to this better than I can, but you can't get a bid on how much it's going to cost for a project until you have the designs for them to the specs for them to bid.

So, that's what this is.

Yeah. I mean, it's like um for any type of build, you're going to have to get a design build and there's a fee. There's always going to be a fee with that, but generally, so we did get a cost analysis for the three uh reconstruction of the three existing courts. And then we got the fourth, which was an add-on. So the site survey, the site analyst, the survey survey, the geotechnical inspection, uh the uh uh strummatic design, uh design development, and the permits that's going to be the same whether it's going to be for asphalt or it's going to be for concrete. That's part of that 415.

So, um, for the three courts, yeah, that for the total of that, um, also the construction documents in the bidden is 33,500.

To add in that fourth court brings it up to the 415. So, we're we're looking at the three courts for the 335. For that fourth additional court because there's nothing there. Um, the the design development for that one is the biggest portion of that. It's 65%. It's $10,000 750. Brings that up to the 415.

So your design analysis for the three quarts or the four quarts, the processes is going to be the exact same whatever material you're going to use. So your 415 isn't going to go to waste. What's going to come out of it is either you want to have a court what's either concrete post tension or the asphalt and that's where the cost is going to be.

So, he's going to give me analysis that either it's going to be for concrete with this or asphalt for this. And that we're going to notice the the analysis that we're looking for approval tonight is the overall design with the layout and the the site survey, the site analyst and so forth.

Gotcha. So, this actually isn't relating to just the post tension. I mean, this is Well, no. So, the part of the spec was for post tension. That is correct. But we're asking for we'd like to get a price. So when you when they do all this instead of just having post tension give us also a cost analysis for asphalt so we can see the difference.

So assuming the design isn't different, it should be nominal to increase to the scope.

It it without without talking to, you know, the contact over there, I wouldn't want to speak, but um having done enough builds, again, I'm not a tennis guy, but having having done enough builds, it should be absolutely. She's just creeping up behind him.

I mean my only point is we're he he's already for 415 he's creating two designs right with post post tension concrete three or four that right either three quarts or four quarts that's two sets of conceptual schematic designs two sets of design development documents right when you think of like what we're going to get like productwise now we're saying in addition to this 415 we I want you to draw up a whole different set of asphalt for three and asphalt for four. So there's going to be conceptual and schematic design and design development for two different types of courts for two different options three and four. So we are asking him to come up with two more sets of design plans which are going to be different based upon specifications for asphalt courts and specification for post tension.

Right? So that's what we don't know is like how much do they differ in their design. I mean obviously the materials they're bidding would be quite different. Um, but I don't I mean the the the the visual schematic of how they lay out is probably not that's probably the same for both. But we don't know. We won't know until we find out, right?

Site analysis would be the same. Survey would be the same. Geotechnical investigation. That's pretty much where it stops, right? Then we're asking him to do four sets of conceptual and schematic design and then design development.

permitting would probably be the same.

Yeah. Right. Um and then but then construction documents would probably be the same because hopefully we would have made a decision by then and he doesn't create the construction documents until we have a choice.

So that's why it's very hard for us to say what this might be.

Um because part of it's going to be the same but part of it isn't. But we are asking him to do twice the work for two components of that at least.

Right. So a portion of it, right? So it's not all wasted to your point. A lot of it is duplicated but um in in Michelle 115 for the three for conceptual and design and then um almost 15 for the four for conceptual schematic and design. So if he's doing that for both, right, it could be another 25,000, right? Yeah.

The other Yeah. So can can I just get Colin's question first?

um based on other tennis courts that have been built in the state of Maine in the last I don't know couple years uh what is the ballpark that we are looking at for either an asphalt or a concrete uh tennis court because the reason I'm asking is because isn't all of this sort of moot if um the numbers that we're talking about. Let's say for example, it costs a million dollars to make um the cheaper tennis court.

And so we would do all this work and we would find that that information out and then um that would be somehow brought before the board uh as part of the budget process where we have $190,000 only $190,000 in there. And then we'd be asking the board to say, will you commit to $800,000 to pay for a tennis court in a year where we're proposing to cut um likely to be cut uh cutting a number of um staffing positions as a cost cutting measure so that we don't um pass on as much cost to the taxpayer. So, I guess like like I'm all for I'm all for expending this money, but at the same time like I I just I I don't know like do we have any sense of that because I think like if like we're talking like minimum a million dollars. I'm just I am making up numbers off the top of my head, but if we're talking about that then like we're not building a tennis court this year.

Like we're just we're just not. So, I just sort of like we've gotten estimates multiple times in the past several years.

Um, very sort of back of the napkin because we haven't done the work necessary to fully flesh out a budget.

They I feel like they've been as low as 250,000 and as high as half a million. I don't I know one of them that Craig Sickles the previous um athletic director had gotten was for the post tension. This was several years ago and that one was the half million I believe.

I'm I see you raising your hand Molly.

We just don't engage back and forth. So sorry. Um there will be another public comment at the end. Um, so I guess are are we saying that in in if if we're committing to to to this um uh uh to this we're committing to this um funding um I guess can we also say to ourselves that we are doing that with an understanding that if that and also sort of saying to our community saying to the students and the and the um the coaches and the and the boosters saying that this is not a this is not a commitment um that we are going to be building this tennis court um the next fiscal year uh necessarily. Um but it is it is basically allowing us to know um the information that we really need to know which is what it's going to take to do it. Um, and then we develop a plan, whether it's a one-year plan, whether it's a two-year plan, a three-year plan, whether we do external fundraising or what have you. Is that what we're talking about?

Yeah. So, I don't think this Yeah. I don't think this commits us to say that there will be new new courts in like ideally they would we would have new courts next fall. Um, but um to your point, we we just don't have enough information to definitively say that right now. I think one thing we didn't talk about tonight, although we have talked about in the past, is sort of the various funding sources for a project like this. So, we have 190,000 in that that reserve account. That is one piece.

Um there have been discussions about local fundraising between the boosters and community members um that are are um invested in improving those courts. That is another avenue. There are grant opportunities with USA, USA um that support communities that are building um new courts. Uh so that is another that is another avenue. All of those things are really rellyant on us knowing what's the what's the target that we're trying to raise and we won't know that until we do this piece. It is very much like the chicken and the egg. You're like, well, how much do we need?

Well, we don't know. But we got to spend money to find out how much money we need to spend. So this is really that that first I mean we've we've sort of danced around this for several years getting back of napkin estimates but this would really be the first step to say okay what do we have? What is our ground support? What is our our land support in terms of the number of courts and what does that look like uh for cost? And then we can say, "Oh my god, it's $2 million. That's not happening this year." Or, "Ah, you know, it's it's 450 to 500 maybe between what we have and and what we can fund raise and what we can grant raise." Like, we're in the ballpark.

Yeah, that's great. I just I just want that to be clear to to the community that that that is what we are that is what we're talking about and we don't we don't know those next steps because we don't have that information and so we are we are just very technically not making any commitment to to do that. um on any particular time scale just for very pragmatic reasons.

Yeah. Kelly.

Yeah. And I just wanted to add that that the reason why the facility and operations committee wanted to add these two additional pieces with the asphalt is that we were concerned about the cost upfront and we do we are sensitive to the fact that if it is too high it may be just too much for our community to bear to start this project right away.

So, we are sensitive to that and that's one of the reasons why we wanted to get these additional options to see if that might bring it within a kind of a reasonable cost for our community.

Yeah.

Do we know if CHA um can provide any kind of indication of if they know about um the rates of inflation that have been happening to raw materials and things like that? I know as somebody married to a trades person, I can say raw material has been skyrocketing in price in the last two to three years, 5 to 10 years. Um, so I'm worried that this 250 to 500 ballpark is actually like quadrupled since that time.

I mean, it's very possible. Um, you know, I I think that's the other reason we're going to get these, right? Um, you know, we we don't have we don't have the numbers we need yet. That that was kind of why I said it was several years ago.

I actually think it was 450 the number we had the last one from Craig for the post intention, but that was a fair amount of time ago. So, I just round it up. Yeah. My my other concern is of course is every bid is a snapshot. So as we move toward getting a goal, who knows what's going to happen once we hit that.

Sure. Right. Yeah. I mean, you know, if we say, okay, they give us a bid and we go, okay, it's going to take us four years to save that. You're like, well, then you need to save more than that, right? Like we worked on that with the with the phase, you know, the phases of the EMC audit, right? Um, so yeah, I think all of that gets taken into account, right? I I think there's there's a lot of different pieces at play. I think the fact that we currently don't have playable courts um will incentivize us to find a solution forward here. Um it's not like we have courts that are like they're okay and we want to save for a little longer to be able to get the really nice ones. Like that would make a lot of sense, but when we don't even have courts to play on at this point, that may make us that may steer us one way or the other. There's a lot of things that I think come to come to bear on this decision. So yeah, I guess just one of my things in recent meetings has been like kind of like like leadership and taking responsibility. So I think I just want to say that like without pointing fingers either at ourselves or to any particular like members of our of our staff that like uh eight months ago we were saying this is okay like we were that's what just what you said we're not saying now we were saying that eight months ago right someone had come in and told us that right yeah uh I just want to just sort of own that let's just I think let's just own that and let's think about um what other things uh are like that? Um what other things are kind of in the okay territory and we're kind of like um not looking at them closely enough.

Yeah. No, that's that's a fair point. Um and I I think I think we've made some good progress on that front. Not specifically the tennis courts until this point, but just the whole um energy audit project. I mean, a lot of those things, you know, we have seen we've seen capital plans since I got on the board forever ago. Um, and none of them sort of laid out the system that we have now that you know, or the or the uh the transportation replacement plan. Yeah.

You know, like I think we're making strides in that front.

Just to be clear, absolutely. And like Glenn, the work you've done is like extraordinary and what the facilities crew has done is extraordinary. I just also want to say like again Yeah. And I think it also is I think let um I would I would really prefer it if we don't like kind of wink at that and we just more sort of like own it and kind of be like yep like again uh um mistake made lesson learned. Uh let's keep moving and um see if we can head some of those things off in the future.

Can I just add I think you make a really important point and for me the point is that we were hearing a lot of voices telling us one thing but um the official voices were saying something else and I think it's just important for us as a board to try to listen carefully to what our community is telling us.

Okay. So we have a motion, we have a second. Um we have a well we have a couple of options. We can vote on this 415 today um to get that contract moving knowing that there will likely be uh an ask um for some amount of increase um to to add those two additional components.

Mhm.

We can table it tonight and wait for that information so that we can vote on it once having all of that. Um, I guess those are our two choices.

If we do defer a vote, will it delay the process? Everything to Yeah.

Let's vote. Let's vote. Let's vote for this money. Let's vote for this money.

Get it moving. And then if we need some more money, let's vote to get that money and get these tennis courts going. It'd be great if we could just do the the energ uh engineering portion of it. You know, from my personal uh perspective, being a facility guy, I want to know what's going on underneath. I want to know how we got here because that question has never been asked and if it has, it hasn't been answered, right? So, I'm kind of the meat and potato type of guy. So, I want to get in there and figure out what's going on. So if we can the sooner we can start that process, the sooner I can understand how we got here and what the best course of action may be.

No, I think that I think that's a good call because like we said, a lot of this has to be done regardless of which road we go. Yeah.

So if we can start the regardless work now and hold off on the specific to which plan we want work until we know what the additional cost is, like maybe we decide we only want the asphalt cost, right? Maybe just just just do as just shift it to asphalt. See if that changes, you know, if it's too much to bear both.

I mean, I met with Jason, a couple vendors out there. We did the walk tour.

They they gave us a a napkin number, but doing the walk tour doesn't tell me anything because I can't see underground, right? So, until we can get underneath it, give me my core samples, then I got some data I can look at. But for right now, I'm just looking at a court that needs a lot of work.

Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, maybe what we find from the core samples is that asphalt is not uh uh conducive to Well, it may not be for that particular area, right? So, for what we have exactly. So, that's what we need to know and that that's going to make it for harder conversations, but at least we know that right now we're just guessing, spinning.

Yeah. Okay. Valley.

With that said, is it possible to carve out just the amount that's required for the pre-work or are we just going to go forward with the 41 just to have that as a spendable amount?

I mean, my my thought is you would be able to be back at our next meeting with an updated amount. You think? Absolutely.

So, two weeks. I mean, I don't think they're going to blow through, you know.

I don't think they're going to get that much done. I mean, I hope they're super efficient, but I doubt they I'm hoping we're drilling that. That's what I'm hoping for. the rest of the stuff. No, but let's let's get some core samples and let me take a look at because that actually can be done right now. And like we've asked that question like it can be being done in January. Well, some of the frost is coming out.

So, now is the the Now's the time to do it. Now's the time to do it. Yeah.

Okay. So, we have a motion. We have a second. Any other comments or questions? All those in favor?

Thank you. None. Wonderful. Thank you. Appreciate it.

And thank you for all the work of the folks in the in the audience uh that are here committed to this too. This is just the beginning of the process. So um thank you Moon.

Um all right. So um that is all of our new business. We have no personnel. We are back to public comment because we put two on the agenda. So same rules apply. Can I make a comment?

You can you can go again. Still three minutes, but yeah.

Um I I just wanted to answer some of the questions that were brought up. Um my understanding is that um you know and and I have personal knowledge and have seen the estimates that we've gotten in the past. Several of them have been updated or done in the last year. And all of those previous estimates which were for the asphalt method of construction um were within a certain range you know I would say 250 to 400.

There wasn't a huge difference in those estimates and I think we had four of them. Um, so, uh, what I will say about post-tension is I would really be curious to know what all of the other schools in the area have. Um, I know that York just recently redid their courts. Yarmouth has some pretty new courts. Um, I think it would be really useful to know from them what they did.

Um because my personal just sense of these things from talking to different um you know professionals I'm you know part of a facility that just had their courts redone is that um you know post-tension courts are not really just best practices. It's more like buying a Rolls-Royce versus a Toyota. So, I really am concerned about that being a direction that we're going in and um especially when we are cutting staff.

Thank you.

Um hello again. I just want to thank you guys so much for um getting the ball rolling on the um money to take a look at what's under our tennis courts and get it started. And I just really wanted to like thinking about timing and everything just paint a picture. So for this year for our tennis season, we do not have courts at Freeport. We will have to find a way to practice at a location that's going to require individual transportation.

And so students who cannot get that transportation, who cannot carpool with um other teammates in a safe way will not be able to participate this season.

Uh we most likely will not have consistent access to those courts due to weather or um if we are practicing at say Pineland, we um they will have other people there who most likely book court times ahead of us. So our practice will not be consistent. we will not have consistent competition and that's very discouraging to myself including the many people that are working in the off season who are looking to um perform well this season and possibly look at playing outside of high school. And um all that being said, I would just like you, the board, to seriously consider when you get those estimates back, really thinking about um having a good timeline for this because you are leaving a small but very dedicated group of students without a sport that they very much enjoy. Uh and our courts have not seen real attention since, as was said, the 80s, which is unfortunately a very long time for where we're standing today. And so time is of the essence to make sure that um all of our sports at Freeport are accurate or equally represented and have um equal ability to play and to feel as if they're part of our sports community. Thank you. Thank you, Hazel.

All right. So, um, item 16 is an executive session. Do I have a motion to enter into executive session as outlined in one MRSA section 4056A for the purpose of discussing the superintendent's evaluation?

Kelly Karen. Thank you. All those in favor? I'm going to assume Collins in favor, none opposed.

============================================================

RSU5 BOARD OF DIRECTORS MEETING TRANSCRIPT
Meeting Date: January 28, 2026
Source File: transcript_2026-01-28_Yujt36f5nJU.txt
District: Regional School Unit 5 (Freeport, Durham, Pownal, Maine)
============================================================

Good evening. Welcome to the RSU5 board of directors. It is Wednesday, January 28th, 2026. We're at the Freeport High School. We have a excuse me, a full board with the exception of the vacant Durham spot. Uh, I do believe that the the select board has sent out um an email, a news blast to the community today suggesting folks that are interested in uh the six months between now and when the election uh would happen in June. Um there is a a process to submit a letter of interest. Um so I would suggest folks from Durham that are interested in that um seek that out through the town office. Um it would just be it's a six or well I guess fivemonth appointment through June. Um my sales pitch is that this is a great way to find out if the school board is something you're interested in without committing to a three-year term. So you can try it out for six months and then if you love it, you just run again in June and and we're all on our way. So um just want to throw that out there as a reminder for folks who may be watching um because we certainly want to get that spot filled. All right. Uh otherwise we have a full board here and we will get started with the pledge of allegiance.

And while the first budget meeting may be a longer meeting, uh I have heard word on the street is that on the street at 11 o'clock there's a parking ban and I'm parked on Hullbrook Street. So we will definitely be out before that. So you're welcome.

All right. So, do I have a motion for consideration and approval of the minutes from the January 14th, 2026 meeting as presented, barring any errors or omissions? Valerie, thank you. Cara, all those in favor? Great. None opposed. Uh, adjustments.

Yes.

Yes. I'm going to ask that we table item 12A, which is consideration and approval to join cohort 3 of early childhood special education. Although I do have some remarks about that that I will make in my report.

All right. Uh look at that. Making the meeting shorter already. Thank you, Tom.

Uh so we will move on to item six, which is good news and recognition. So we will look to Maria for that. Hello. So we have officially wrapped up midterm week.

Thank god. and we have started semester 2. We had the curriculum fair and senior project meetings today. We have some new classes this semester and this is the last high school semester ever for our class of 2026.

Eighth grade and eighth grade student and family night was last night. We had over 40 FHS student volunteers for tours and club organizations as well as faculty from every department there to meet eighth graders and families to share information about FHS.

The student leadership committee hosted conversations with students and staff to discuss communication within our community and they will share the data and action steps with the whole school in midappril and with the board in May.

The one act rehearsals are in full swing. The show is coming up so stay tuned. I don't know the dates so please don't ask me but it is coming up. Um the winter sports are approaching the end of their season and spring sports will start in late March. And we have awesome news that Mr. Greer was selected by the US track and field and cross country coaches association as a 2025 high school cross country coach for the year of the state of Maine. We are very lucky to have Mr. Greer as our coach and our teacher. That's all. That's great news. Congratulations.

All right. Uh we will move on to item seven which is public comment. When I walk by the list, I didn't see anybody who'd signed up, but I will.

Okay, my quick pause. There will be another opportunity at the end of our agenda. So, we will move on to item eight, which is the report from the superintendent.

Okay, good evening everybody. Um, I have a lot to talk about tonight.

So this has definitely been since our last meeting a very complex stretch of time for the district with many overlapping issues that have arisen. Um I can I very much appreciate the care and the seriousness with which the board and our administrative team who are here tonight and the staff have approached uh have used to approach this work. Um tonight I'm going to be touching on four areas, excuse me. The first is student and staff safety.

Next is early childhood education.

Third is the budget. And then last is just the broader context of all of that and how we're navigating that together.

So first with regard to student and staff safety, um I need to acknowledge the situation that is going on in our area with regard to the presence of ICE in our area. And there have been incidents highlighted in the media.

There has been discussion about that.

Um, I need to acknowledge there is a full spectrum of perspective on that issue and it is not my job and it is not the school district's job to take a position on that as a political debate.

So that's not what my remarks are aimed at doing.

But I do feel I have a responsibility to be honest about what we're seeing and hearing and experiencing here in our district. And that is that there is fear. There is fear here. It is widespread. It's affecting people disproportionately. Some people are very directly affected. And our job as a school system is to respond to that fear with calm and that is what we're trying to do. So even if there are incidents that are not occurring on our campuses, which there are not so far, um the impact and the anxiety that people are feeling are real.

So, we have, as I sent out to staff and students and parents, we have taken a look at our protocols around what to do if people come to the schools. In particular, what to do if non-local law enforcement come to schools. We've reviewed what the law is around that.

We've reviewed what our students and staff's rights are. and we have a protocol in place for how to respond that keeps calm and follows the law and protects people's rights. Um we have worked very closely to um make sure that the expectations are clear and consistent and we are responding to the needs of individuals as they arise in a very sensitive way.

Um, we are doing everything we can that is within the the excuse me, the framework of the policies that we have and the law to support individuals who are directly affected and on a case-byase basis in a thoughtful way. I want to emphasize that I believe we are as prepared as we can be in the face of a very uncertain situation and frankly an unprecedented situation that I don't think we've ever had to contend with before. Um we certainly cannot anticipate every scenario.

We are grounded in respect and empathy and realism about what we're facing and we are again I want to emphasize the job of the adults in the school is to maintain groundedness and that is what we're striving to do and to be thoughtful rather than reactive. Um, and we're also mindful that our actions or communications could um draw undo attention that we don't want to draw. So, we're trying to stay the course and be responsive.

Um, now I'd like to talk about early childhood. So, I just tabled um I asked to table another motion as I did last week to vote on whether or not to enter the cohort 3 for early childhood. The reason for that is that I still don't have all the information from the state that I would need to have to lay before you to make that decision informed. Or I should say as of the time this agenda was written and finally proofed, I didn't have that information. I can report that at 5:16 tonight while I was in the finance committee meeting, a very lengthy email came in with all kinds of information, but I need to digest that and I hope to bring it to you next week.

Um, I did receive phone confirmation earlier this morning from Megan Welter, who is the deputy commissioner, that the allocation that we should expect to receive will be about half of what we originally requested.

So I need to take a look at that with the team and decide what that means for stepping into cohort 3. To me it's very important that particularly in the context of other items that we will discuss tonight that we can do this without impact to the local taxpayer right now. So I need to look at what they're saying that they'll provide us and figure out how that would enable us to step in to that cohort. And I will bring you more information next week when I have that broken down for you.

Um, we would need to part of the information that Megan also gave me this morning is that we would need to make a commitment to join cohort 3 by early March at the latest.

It is now late January and if I think about what lies between us and early March, February vacation is also in there. So to me, early March really means before February vacation. So that means we have two weeks. So um we'll be doing our best to look at this and bring you something to vote on hopefully next week. Um that also I'm mindful that we started this process very deliberately in the hope of being transparent and inclusive by having a task force. Um, I don't know that within the two-eek time frame we have time to reconvene that task force, but I need to at least communicate with the folks on there and invite them to board discussions that we will have. So, that's part of what I need to be transparent about. Now, the timeline of this information from the state has just given us something to contend with.

Um, if I pause for a moment, are there any quick questions about that before I go forward?

Sorry, just quickly on you said half of what we requested I don't what who is requesting what from whom.

So the way that the funding formula for early childhood is supposed to work is that the the mandate is that school districts take this over from CDS. The money that is currently going to CDS to for these services is supposed to be diverted to school districts. And when we did the work with the task force at first, the state gave us a spreadsheet to work with that calculated what we were supposed to get. And it was Kelly who discovered a couple of weeks ago that their spreadsheet actually had a calculation error embedded in two cells.

And those cells were what made it look like we were going to get a million dollars when actually it looks like we're going to get about a half a million dollars. So we have to figure out how to make it work with that reduction. Thank you.

Okay. Uh, let me talk about the budget.

So, we're obviously going to talk about the budget a lot tonight.

I want to talk about this very carefully and with a lot of empathy. This has been this is going to be a challenging conversation and it's going to be a heavy conversation.

First of all, the staff across the district have just within the past few days received news about what the budget what the impact is likely to be on individuals.

Um there has been great professionalism shown throughout that process. I really have to thank the people sitting back there, the administrative team. Um they for months we've been talking about this. We've been brainstorming about this. We've been thinking about how to approach it.

They've been empathetic. They've been extremely collaborative thought partners. Um, and they did something, every single person on that team did something which is very difficult, which is to step back from your own lens, the lens of your domain, your building, your school, your whatever to look back and see what the impact across the board is. And that can be very very difficult to do. But it it is the lens that we kept as a group and I'm very grateful for that. Um the staff have also been very steadfast as information has been shared and I'm grateful for that too because in moments like this again I return to a theme of groundedness.

It's the groundedness of the adults in the system that helps co the kids co-regulate. And I'm very grateful when staff even when they have gotten bad news or difficult news have really come forward for their work with kids with professionalism.

Um the fact that we are here this evening again I want to make sure everyone understands it means that the individuals who would be directly affected by the changes that I'm going to describe in detail tonight have already been informed by their immediate supervisors.

That's the people who would be immediately affected. Um, and obviously those are not easy conversations. Um, in I do have to add in full transparency that the ripple effects of these changes cannot be fully anticipated at this time. And that's simply because between now and the end of the school year or even the end of concluding our our budget discussions, there could be any number of things happen. There could be retirements, there could be resignations, there could be things that affect the jobs that are available. So that will obviously mean different conversations would have to happen.

Um, I also want to take this opportunity before I present the budget later tonight to just gently remind everyone why we're here talking about the budget the way we are.

We have to look systemically at our budget.

We also systemically means two things to me. It means a view to the organization as a whole and it means an eye toward not just next year. It means an eye toward the long term.

It is also when you when you see my slideshow tonight, what will naturally pop out are specific positions that are up for discussion to be reduced.

What I want to emphasize is that behind every one of those positions that you see listed are hours of conversation around what are we maintaining.

Everything that's listed there is listed because it has come after many discussions of about here's what we need to keep and here are the ways that we can keep what is most essential.

And that includes things like keeping our first grade, second grade, kindergarten, etc. are within reasonable class sizes. It means keeping supports for the neediest students.

And so I feel that that lens is really important to emphasize going into it. Um this is we are talking about reductions, but on the flip side of that, we're really talking about what we're keeping, what what our choices will enable us to maintain. Um, you will see that in my recommendation tonight. And the themes that we emphasize are keeping the class policizes within policy guidelines in each school and at each grade level. Um, and I want to talk a little bit more about our process for doing that.

We have more than doubled the amount of hours that are typically spent by the administrative team to consider the budget. we have deferred other conversations that needed to happen because we had to talk about this a lot.

Um the first conversations were using the staff feedback to establish criteria for what was most important to preserve and then we applied those criteria to the situations we found. Um because as Colin recently said uh a budget is a moral document. So we really tried to ground it in prior criteria that were established from input from the staff and we're keeping the long view in mind and part of why I the rationale that I need to articulate is that we need to position RSU5 to be able to anticipate what will come not just next year but in future years. We need to be able to, if I take early childhood as an example, we need to be able to be sure that we can do early childhood in a way that we feel good about.

And we may very well need to have the flexibility financially to do that in future years. We need to position ourselves to be able to do that. We need to think about buildings that we may need to build in the future and being able to do that. We may need to think about programs that we haven't even envisioned yet because the world has not changed in a way that we can have thought about them yet, but they're out there.

We just need to be on firm footing to be responsive and flexible in that way. Some of that work has already been done.

And part of what I want to emphasize in this budget is that there are many forward-thinking ideas that you all and I have to give a lot of credit to Kelly have already started on. We have a very forwardthinking energy audit that is keeping our buildings where we need them to be. We have a vehicle replacement plan that is very forward thinking and responsible.

We have reserve accounts for many major capital pieces of infrastructure. That's really important. Not every district has those. That's a good solid place to keep building upon.

So the budget I hope I can tell you that when we talk about the level of budget that I will recommend it keeps it will still provide it will provide a robust education for kids. It will keep multiple offerings for kids and it will support kids where they need it the most.

and it will position us to go forward in the future with stability in mind.

So, you will see um tonight when I present three budget tiers, the three tiers that you asked for back in November, a status quo budget is over 10% and I don't know how that shakes down in each town, but it doesn't necessarily shake down that at 10% at each town. It could very well be more than that in certain towns. Um, you've asked for roughly eight, seven, and six%. My recommendation is the 7% tier. It's tier two. It's the middle tier.

Um, and I'm also going to tell you very strongly that I will present you the the lowest tier, which is a 6% increase. I do not recommend that tier. Um, as you'll see, the way we would what we would need to do to get there is pretty extreme. So I I want to make it clear I'm it's more an academic exercise for me to present that rather than a recommendation. It is not recommended.

So just to zoom out a little bit um this is a moment that tests it's not just a test of our finances. It's a test of our relationships.

And honestly the way that any organization makes decisions is what defines the relationships. That's true in an organization. It's true in a family. It's true in a partnership. The way you make decisions together is in fact diagnostic of what your relationship is.

So I go forward hoping that even though I anticipate disagreement about the proposal that will come forward because that would be healthy.

um we will continue to approach the work collaboratively and with care for each other and a commitment to what is best for kids and to working through that. So I'm grateful for all of you to engaging with this thoughtfully and professionally and under strain and for the community that they are trusting us to do this even when the conversations are hard.

Okay. Thank you. And I do also have a new hire to report.

Nate Walwrath is coming on board as an edtech here at Freeport High School.

Great. All right. So, that is item eight.

Uh, and we move on to item nine, which is Kelly with our finance administrator report.

Sorry.

So, uh, in your packet this evening is the are the expendit revenues and expenditures through December 31st, 2025. Believe it or not, it's halfway through our fiscal year. Um, and as you can see on the revenue side, we are um almost directly even on that as far as what we expected. Um, the expenditure side, we're still um healthy and on track even though it looks at like the 8.8% number that you see. That's largely because all of the salaries and benefits for the employees uh throughout the district are included in the incumbrance numbers. Um so it's really reflecting what we anticipate spending through the end of the year. Um the other the other numbers that are within those are um some debt service commitments and some other open purchase orders that we haven't paid the invoices for for uh supplies, materials, and all of those things that the schools um live off of.

So, at this point, I do not see any uh foresee any issues with the current budget as it stands.

Questions for Kelly?

Don't go far. I'm sure we'll have questions for you tonight.

All right. So, we will move on to item 10, which is board comments and committee reports. Uh the first is board information exchange and agenda requests. I know we have a few of the uh finance facilities and policy are going to give a report but just wanted to provide an opportunity for um either request information from board members or members of other uh committees that wanted to provide an update.

Valerie, I just have a very brief non-update update um from region 10. We still haven't heard back on this from the state on our three submissions for funding.

So, were they grant fund requests or Yes, I think so. There were the building fund requests where you submit and then they partially fund and then we would have to fund the rest by probably some sort of town vote.

So, similar to uh and maybe this isn't a fair question for you since I don't think you're on the board when we did this. Um the bridge that they did at it is yeah they kept mentioning the bridge. It's exactly the same kind of process.

I wasn't there but they kept referring to it. So which is really just the entrance to region 10. It sure is.

Yeah. So I don't know why they call it a bridge but they do. It was confusing to me until I actually went to site and I was like oh this must be it. Um yes. So, it's an elevator, um, a sawdust removal system, and a third thing that I do not recall, but I'm sure is very important.

And do they have a deadline for when they would have to have the approval from the state in because I my recollection was it had to go on to the ballot that we did in June. So, I think they were trying to get the referendum out uh off cycle because the elevator maybe needs to happen over the summer uh while children or students are not in session. So, I my understanding is the state said by February, which is rapidly dwindling in time. So, uh I don't know.

I haven't gotten any emails updating, but we're hoping to have something soon.

Okay. Well, more to come on that one. It sounds like it's an apt description of a non-update update. So, there's an update there. It's just we don't have all the info yet. It's a common theme tonight.

Uh any other updates, comments.

All right. So, um item 10B was the finance committee and facilities and operations joint meeting. Um you doing that one, Kelly?

Well, I thought you were gonna do both.

Um, okay. So, um, part of we we did a joint, um, facilities, uh, and operations committee along with finance in December. Um, one because there's only one board meeting in December, so one of them would have had to miss out on their meeting. And two, um, it was a good opportunity to sort of bring those two groups together. And by two groups, I mean Kelly and I are on both. Um so we were already there anyway. Um but the the other members of those of those committees um to talk about um the energy audit and the phasing of that and what the financial impact of that is. Uh so we we talked about uh you know what phase 2 looks like, what's included in phase 2. Um, one of the one of the I think good things that was built into the system was kind of a bit of flexibility that as things arose uh in terms of um importance or need to be fixed, they could be moved around through the phases. So some things we thought were going to be in phase two got moved to phase one and vice versa.

Um so Glenn was able to give us an update on those along with the vehicle and equipment replacement plan. uh similarly how those uh are moving into their next steps. Um and we started the discussion on the uh the tennis court replacement with an update on how that RFPQ RFQ went. Um and um so that went out and was received back. Um at that point uh the this the district had not yet met with the winning bidder who at the time was the who was the only bidder on that project um CHA architects. Um but since then uh there has been updates and meetings and Kelly will talk about that in the finance or excuse me in the facilities uh report from January. Um and then the other thing we talked about which um we have talked about here at the board because we approved um a a transition um excuse me a transfer from the um capital reserve for the FA uh the FHS pumps uh the variable flow something I don't know sorry Glenn I messed it up variable flow device there it is um so uh so We we had talked about that and the need for those which then came to the board for an approval which uh was done. Um so it was really an update on kind of how phase one went uh and then the work on phase two that's ongoing. Um this was in December I know uh in over break uh a variety of projects were actually able to be done. Uh and my understanding is the lights are arriving and some of the schools are getting done. So um oh that's in yours. Okay.

So, we'll just kick it over to Kelly for the rest of it.

Facilities and operations committee met on the 14th of January. Um, and the vast majority of our meeting time was spent discussing the updates to the FHS tennis courts. Um, Glenn Reynolds reported, as has already been mentioned, that CHA was the one and only bidder um, respondent to the bid for the engineering and design services. Um Glenn did meet with um representatives from CHA to discuss the scope of work.

They um submitted a proposal for engineering design services and project management for the construction of the courts. And they recommended um replacing the three existing asphalt courts and potentially adding a fourth court um if feasible with post-tension concrete construction.

Uh because in their research the post tension concrete provides the best overall qual quality in terms of durability, longevity and overall upkeep. Um however there was some concern that the cost of post-tension courts may be more than our district can bear. So um some committee members and some guests expressed concerns about that and requested that we also asked the vendor to give us pricing for design and construction of asphalt courts which I understand they will do. They will provide that at no additional cost.

Um, next, Glenn did talk to us a little bit about the energy audit phase one project update, which is that we are actually now and I think probably by now have installed the um new energy efficient lighting at Panel Elementary School. Uh, also a new fire panel has been installed at Panel and fire protection devices have been added at Durham Community School.

Um, finally, an update on the Capitol project list. Uh, Glenn shared that over the December break, they were able to replace some bathroom flooring in the boys's bathroom at Mor Street School and solve a little odor problem in there.

So, that's about all we talked about.

Questions on finance or the facility committee updates?

Okay. So, we will move to policy Colin.

Uh, good evening. The policy committee met on Wednesday, January 8th via uh Google Meets. Um, we looked at a couple different policies. One um for law change uh which is the JICJ which we're bringing to you uh for second read. um tonight. Um and we're we also uh discussed as part of regular review um GICK and GICKR uh bullying and bullying administrative procedure um which we are bringing to you for first read um tonight and I'll speak more about um each of those uh later. We also looked at uh GBCC employee uses cell phones um but there were no changes made to that policy. So, we're uh as per our usual deal, we're not bringing them before you or we are I don't I think it's included just for information purposes.

Yeah, but we're not we're not we're not reading it. We're not reading we're not first or second reading it is I think what I meant. But thank you, Cara.

Thanks for keeping me honest. Um uh love Colin. That's the end of that report.

brief pause. Move on to the next. Okay.

So, do you want me to get a motion on the floor for first? Are we doing them all together?

Yes.

Okay. We can pull one out. I don't know which one, but if we had to, we could.

Um, so, all right, we'll get a a motion on the floor for Do I have a motion for consideration and approval of second read for the following policies? J I CJ, student use of cell phones and other personal electronic devices. EB CF automated external defibrills, AEDs, and EBBD, temperature standards in schools.

Stephanie and Kelly, thank you.

Great. So, we bring before you uh these three policies for second read. Um I will just skip uh for the moment to EBCF and EBBD.

Uh we did not make any changes to those policies after first uh read. Um so you're seeing them as uh we dis as we discussed them previously. Um we did however uh make a number of changes to the um to JIC uh JICJ the student use of cell phones and other personal electronic devices. Um uh I guess the history lesson is we talked about this in was that December?

November. December. Um and uh we had a good uh we had a good chinwag about that and heard a lot of um of great feedback from uh from the students and from the community and we and you gave us a lot of feedback as well. Um and we went back and reshaped that. So that is what we're bringing to you tonight. Um I I have a relatively lengthy uh kind of breakdown of like what of like what we changed.

Um, but I thought I would just maybe sort of begin with anything that jumped out to any of you um that you noticed.

Um, and we could talk about that first. Like a quiz. What did we notice? What's that? It's like a quiz. Like what did we know?

Well, it's more I just don't want to I don't want to It's like a lecture and I don't want to deliver a lecture. So, we love when you lecture, Colin. Um, so I just want to make sure one thing I I believe I understand this change but want to confirm. Yeah. um was uh in that first paragraph the or without internet or cellular was struck through. My my recollection of that decision was around allowing um earbuds because they don't have their own direct connection to the internet but could be used to for students with their with their laptops etc based on some feedback. Is that was that an accurate maybe not?

I'm not sure that's accurate. Um my recollection of that was more for um because if we kept um if we kept or without uh it would have meant like a whole collection of electronic devices that do not have internet but are still studentowned personal electronic devices. Um, so I my recollection though, everyone please jump in here and correct me. Um, was that that was not key to that discussion, but I may be misremembering that that was not one of my lecture notes.

Karen, you maybe Valerie remembers. I My note is that it would be up to the schools to decide on on the headphone specific.

Okay. Well, I remember two specific points. One was the headphones in that it would be pretty obvious if somebody was trying to make a call on their headphones because of shouting at me and how headphones generally work when you're using them without the device itself. Um, but also because it would preclude things like a pedometer or a calculator or numerous other things that are kind of the resurgence of the Walkman. I believe I believe the Walkman was brought up.

Somebody said she's getting one.

Yeah. I mean, unless we're bringing back the abacus, I think we're in trouble with the without verbiage.

I got Yeah. And I think like we mentioned Kindles specifically to reading devices do have internet access.

Yes, that's true. They do. Even the real old ones that I have. So, I think just the I think the a point that will keep coming up tonight, no doubt, is that um there changes that we made to this um based on what the on on what you said, but also based on what we feel is appropriate and what we what we thought the board told us, what the board feels comfortable um making as policy and then what is left to the administrators um to make decisions about. Um, and so again, I'll just say at the beginning of the conversation, just so it's clear, um, there is nothing in here about um the presence or absence of pouches.

Um, that is a decision that will be uh will be left up to the um the administrators to um to decide and then there there will there would be a cost if we were to go that route. Um, but that would then be proposed, but we're not putting anything in here um that directs that one way or the other. So I just want to be clear about that. Um so yeah just to your very particular question no the or without conversation was not that striketh through was not for to allow for earbuds. That would still be a decision that would be made by the um administrators.

Okay. But they are not specifically procluded like the watches and the phones are. That I think that is I think that is accurate. Yeah that is accurate.

You look like you were gonna put your hand up. Maria, you're good for Okay. All right. other other noticings from others.

I do think it read better this way because I know you kind of moved things around and and separ separated things out a little bit differently. It felt to me that it flowed better this way.

That's good. That's positive. Um I did that.

Tom did that, but I like helped him do it. Okay. No, I didn't at all. teamwork makes the dream work.

Other reflections or uh thoughts.

Um as I said, I can go through some of these things just to to make sure that it's in the air of what we were thinking about.

I mean, we had gotten some feedback specifically around the watch piece and maybe it's helpful to talk to the decision to include those in this in this policy. Um because they they do have um I mean they do have if if they're functional other than as a watch then they have access to the internet and and cellular service.

And while some parents may have special modes they can put on, um that's not something that could be governed like student to student, like you wouldn't want someone having to check like the mode and because um you could go in and you know make it so they can call anybody or or you know you can set what the those parameters are and the thought around um you know communication going through the the office and through the emails um seemed seemed seemed appropriate. Um, and thank you for pointing out that this doesn't dictate how these are, you know, how this policy is implemented schoolto school. So, it doesn't say anything about requiring yonder bags. Um, I guess we couldn't make the guarantee that we would never do that, but it's not part of the policy. That would be in the school's decisions on how they wanted to implement the policy. Um, so that is that is not a part of this policy that we're voting on today.

So I think that's that's helpful to know.

Um, again, I don't think in our correct me if I'm wrong, but I think in our um uh policy meeting, we were not talking specifically about whether to include uh smart watches or not. I think that that conversation had happened here.

So I think the the logic that you just articulated was the logic that we were taking into it. Um I think uh again um how that would actually play out depends upon the um depends upon the the the decisions the administration makes. I think one thing I would remind us of is that we are trying to uh one of the goals um the the primary goal uh in this policy is to um well first is to provide clarity. The second is to um create a healthy learning environment for the students and then uh lastly we want also to make things easier for the staff to be able to do their jobs um efficiently.

Um, so I think part of the conversation we were having around smartwatches was if we start um sort of including other items that do have these capabilities that's creating more work for the classroom teachers um or anybody who is uh just in the school and having to police that that's one of the things we are trying to not have to do. Would you say that's accurate Tom and Chris and Cara?

Um, other thoughts?

Does, um, I think I know the answer to this question, but, uh, does the recommendation from the governor last night to put a legislative bell-to-bell ban in place starting in August change how we look at any of this?

I I I don't believe so. I mean, that's kind of fresh off the I mean, it's slightly older than your 5:16 p.m. email from the uh Department of Ed, but um but not quite 24 hours yet, but yeah, I mean, I don't I don't know.

I mean, see that it would seem to me to be that would be a relatively quick moving legislative process for that to be done by August. Um but maybe maybe government is magic. Um and that will and that will they're known to be and that will occur. um other but I don't I don't think so. I mean I think I think if we if we were to if we if we were to pass this tonight and if it uh goes into effect uh July one one um I think we're perfectly primed for that. So, um the good news is we don't have to do like we're not caught now with the possibility um like there's some districts that will not have done this and will not have will not be in a place and then they might be like they would really hope that government will not be efficient because they're not going to be ready for that um August um date that the governor gave.

Okay. I thought that was the answer but just wanted to one thing that might be different going forward is that is how it's implemented since this I believe the state will be providing funding they will have some funds for schools to be able to implement this. So that is still to be determined and might impact how schools are choosing to do that.

Uh Kelly if you wouldn't mind checking their spreadsheet before we spend that money. Sorry. check every spreadsheet.

Um, everyone knows I'm a little uh cautious about what the money from the state comes with.

Yeah. Uh, Tom, is there anything else that you want to just highlight from the conversation from again from kind of the administration's uh point of view?

I think the only thing that's worth mentioning and it dubtales with the presentation I'm going to give later is that we have we're not planning on entering this with yonder bags and we're not budgeting for yonder bags. So, There we go.

Right. So I Yeah. So I think practically um again for everyone keeping track at home that like if this were to be passed tonight and to go into effect July 1 um then at the beginning of the school year um it would be an off and away um situation. And so then that would be what the um some some version of that um rather than um a yonder bag. Again, it's not a binary, but um but it's not yonderbacks, however adorable they are.

I'm just glad it's not the one that I couldn't open repeatedly during that meeting. Yeah.

And the other thing I is worth mentioning, it's not this policy. It's the one that's actually not up for being read. It's the one about employee use of cell phones that's in your packet. The committee reviewed it and really the only reason it went before the committee was because Val had suggested actually in a board meeting that we should look at that while we're looking at the student policy just to make sure that we are consistent. And so we looked at it.

It is consistent. We we don't need to change it, but we've done our due diligence.

Other thoughts or things that we could talk about? Yeah, Kelly.

I think it's overall it's a really great policy. I think you've done a lot of great work on this and I just had a couple of um comments on some of the sections and whether or not they flowed under the subheadings um in particular staff modeling is under prohibited uses of electronic devices and if we're going to include that section at all I'm wondering if there's a better place for it.

Uh similarly with responsibility for personal devices, it's under parent student communication and responsibilities. And while I can see how that could potentially fit there, maybe it would belong under the guidelines or uh somewhere else.

Sorry, Kelly, I got lost in the the um prohibited uses. What was the second point?

Uh the second point was that um the subheading responsibility for personal devices is Yeah. is under parent student communication, right?

Uh yeah, both good catches. Um anybody have any ideas where they want to put those things?

I think the second one is okay. Um it's parent student communication and responsibility. So I think responsibility for personal devices. That's true. That word does connect.

Yeah.

Yeah, I can see that logic. I think it al also could belong under the guidelines section.

I mean, I guess if we're if we're getting wonky, there are only there are only three uh top level headers, right? Isn't that true? There's the guidelines prohibited.

There's guidelines prohibited and parent student communications. So I think uh I think tech I mean I guess just technically the t the u modeling doesn't neatly fit into any of those. Um so probably if we wanted to maintain the three of them I would probably recommend putting it in in the first just because it's the most kind of like broad and kind of overarching. Um so that's one possibility. Yeah. Well, I was just wondering parent student, does that modify both communication and responsibilities? And if not, should we put responsibilities first? And would that make it make more sense in that section?

Um, that it is doing it refers to it is modifying both, but it is doing different work. So that's actually kind of a for anybody for any English teachers uh like uh because it's like well no it's just like parent student is like that that part is about like how do parents and students Yeah.

Let's not uh how do parents and students communicate because that was a concern that was um that was raised uh uh and it was an important one that was raised by the students um like how like how do they get in touch with uh their parents?

So that's what that is about. Um but then I think parent student responsibilities I think that does apply as well. I think it's sort of it's it's noting that it is it is it is a parent um and student decision to allow uh a device to come to um to campus and the responsibility um lies with them. So so the dash is a two in one case and an and in another case.

The dash is wait sorry what which dash?

So parent so it would be parent to student communication and then parent and student responsibilities. Would that be a true statement?

I'm just trying to parse this so that it makes sense. Yeah, sure. Um, slash I mean, bless you guys, but also like we have other we have other things to we have other stuff to do. Uh, so I would say unless that truly substantively alters the meaning and is going to confuse any parents or students, I would say let's leave that as it is. And and I think um one of the things we have done in the past even after a second read vote is you know sort of grammarical grammat grammatical slashclarity you know edits were within your purview as the policy committee. So if you felt the slash versus the dash versus the amperand I trust you guys.

Thank you. Thank you for that. Thank you for that punctuation gift. You're welcome.

Other we should have a whole meeting on it.

Other No, we shouldn't. Uh, other thoughts?

I think this means you did a good job with the policy, the fact that we aren't talking anymore about it.

Yeah. Um, just also I did I did I just want to to give credit where credit is due. Um we uh we were uh joined by um uh Principal Crosby and Principal Gulo uh for that meeting and and they gave us some really helpful sort of on the ground feedback in terms of understanding um the impact and I think one of the takeaways and and again somebody can throw something at me if I'm saying this incorrectly the general sense from uh Principal Crosby was that the like the the ch the the the change that this makes to practices at the middle school or um and I think probably that is also true at Durham Community School would be negligible um because it's not there's not like there are like it's tightening some screws but it's not really changing things substantively. it is changing things sub substantively at the high school. Um and I think that uh I think one note I had in my um notes uh was just that uh no one is under any um uh any illusion um that uh there is great support for this among the student body. Um that's that's known that's understood. Um and uh and I think that um uh principal Gulo feels that uh it's the policy that makes the most sense. She supports it and um that we will find a way to um to implement it in a way that is uh fair um and supportive of the students.

Yeah. And and I'm hopeful that the sort of the off and away approach is kind of a a middle ground. A lot of what we heard from the students is, you know, sort of a push back to the to the um restrictiveness of the of the yonder bags or some other um tool like that.

So, I mean, my hope is that an often away policy can be managed and and implemented without adding more to the teachers plates of policing, but also reaches the goal of, you know, the removing that distraction. So, uh, hopefully hopefully that's seen as somewhat of a of a middle ground there.

Yeah. And I think one of the things we did discuss in that meeting was that the that the u the minds of several uh committee members were changed by the uh the testimony that was given by students. Um and so just again like that is just it's a very important thing for uh so we're so happy that the students came and voiced their concerns and even though the the final result is not um what uh a number of them desired um we did hear that and we did make adjustments um based on that feedback.

Any other comments or questions on this policy?

Okay. So, AEDs, we didn't make any. I thought we already did that one twice. Didn't we already do that one twice?

Or did we table it? Just one word. Oh, right.

We went from should to will, but we're now coming back to should.

Sure. Okay. Yeah. Yeah. Valerie. Um, I hate to be the thorn in everyone's side, but when you need an AED, it's pretty dire.

I feel like we should make it will. And I know we got an email stating that will is not possible in the event that we need to use it.

There's a lag period where we don't have paddles anymore. And I'm wondering if it's possible to have a spare set of paddles at the district office or somewhere so that we can achieve will because I as somebody in healthcare um I would be loathed to not be able to use an AED because we're in that gap time when we need it.

Erica has a comment. Erica Mateo, assistant superintendent.

So, um, we've already discussed as a nursing team to purchase a backup set, um, so that they can be replenished as needed if used or expired, juvenile and adult. Yeah.

So, will is then possible. Can we go back to Will?

I'm just pointing at Will. That's a retirement joke.

Is he talking to me? Is he talking to me? Um yeah, I I agree. It should it should be Will.

Jesus. I agree with Will. Um as I always do. Um um and if it's it's possible and feasible, I mean even if the policy says well and for some reason there is a moment in time where we don't have one.

I mean policies are are what we're striving to be. I mean they are not the law. They are not held us. You know we could be like well you have a policy that says you're going to do this and you didn't do it. So I mean I think this is will have at least one at each school, right? Like I think we adjusted to say like not at every like event or field or whatever because that was challenging based on locations, but I mean if if um assistant Mateo and the nurses feel like will is uh doable, I think that's what the policy should be. Unless I'm missing something. As I recall, one of the concerns was that there may be legal ramifications if we were not able to meet will at any given point in time.

But what I'm hearing from you is that this document isn't legally binding. So if we couldn't for whatever reason meet will, we wouldn't be Yeah. I mean, I think I I think if you if if we had a policy that says we will have one in every school and you went to every school and we didn't have one, that's we probably have a problem there. as if we say, "Well, we'll have one in every school and we have one in every school, but one because we just used it." That seems like a very different thing to have to go to court and be like, "Oh, you're you're liable for that." I mean, I I don't know. Maybe that's an attorney question, but I think I'm not an attorney, but I think actually, as wonky as this is going to sound and is in the weeds as it is, where we might actually get into trouble is if we threw in shall, which does have really just throw another one in.

It does have a different connotation. Okay. So, Shall's out.

Can I Can I retire from the board right now? Is that possible? Mid meeting. Um I think Will is fine.

Okay. We're Let's We We have heard Will is what we are going to do. We will have it. Uh okay.

Uh, so that word is now going to be will, which is spelled W I L L, I think.

Okay. Um, then we have EBB D temperature uh temperature standards for schools.

This also uh we did change we we changed again for people playing along at home. We changed loser to lower, which I'm disappointed in. Uh, and I will just use this opportunity to say I went I've only been to a couple I I ashamed to say I've only been to a couple of um town council meetings, but the town council meeting I did go to, there was a um uh a town ordinance that was under discussion and it was a very long one. and I was going through it and there's a typo in one of them that's so beautiful that I didn't point it out. So, it's still there uh because it's so it's so delightful. It doesn't it doesn't impact anyone's livelihood or safety or anything like that, but it is a very beautiful uh typo. Uh any other thoughts about EBBD?

I don't think I asked this before, but um maybe because Glenn wasn't here, but I I assume this is one that he's weighed in on and and feels like we can meet.

Yes. Uh yes. Okay, great.

Yes, this is under this this was done under advisement. That's a joke. Yeah, Valerie, I have no additional edits except a tiny joke of look what I've done of maybe loser to winner since it's the gym.

Maybe. Yeah, I like that. That's a good joke. That's a good joke. That's Tom, can you make a note of that joke, please?

Thank you. All right. Uh, and anything else on EBBD?

Okay. So, we have a motion and a second on the floor for all three of those policies uh for approval for second read. Any Yes, Anna.

Oh, we already have the She's ready to vote. She's ready to vote. She's moving on. She's thinking about that parking ban. All right. Um can we vote with the going back to Will?

Yes. Yes. With the adjustment. Yep. And then Kelly, we will. We will.

Kelly, did you your category categorization is that a change that can be made after we vote? I think so.

Yes, that's we can we can shift that around as long Yeah, I think as long as it's not substantive and as long we are not as long as we are not um going against the the will of the board or making a decision that is substantively impacting the board's direction.

I agree with that. All right. So, we have a first and we have a second. All those in favor opposed.

You can vote. Yeah.

I don't know if sorry we never told you that.

Um it's Oh, actually this is now back to you for the first read.

All right. So the next one if I can find my agenda. Uh all right. So these are for first read. So do I have a motion for consideration and approval for first read for the following policies? J I C K bullying and J I C KR bullying administrative policy or excuse me procedure Chris and Anna. Thank you.

Um so we're being bringing uh JICK bullying and its accompanying procedure before you. This was um a policy that we were looking at not out of uh of direct legal requirement. It was part of our our uh our cycle of review. Um, and we we've spent a we spent a great deal of time on this one. And also I will give um I will give uh as as the children today say mad props uh to Superintendent No, they do. They definitely do. They have their Walkman's on and um they say that they say that. That's what Superintendent Gray told me. Uh super I retire for the second time this evening.

Uh yeah.

Uh yeah, exactly. It's finished. It's over. At 7:33 p.m. on January 28th in Freeport, it was killed. Um but as we looked into it um the the the um the credit I'm giving to to Superintendent Gray is that uh he went very deep um both into our the existing policy and also looking at a number of sample policies and found um found some areas that we really we did need to update. Um and I'm just going to uh read a couple of notes uh here. Um so the the current or the policy that we did have we found that there were some statutory gaps. Um so there were some things that were um the there were uh 11 mandates um that are made clear in the sample uh policies that are that come from um uh two different two different directions from from the law is where it's coming from. Um and our current policy as as it had been written meet six of those. Um and we needed to update it. So it meant uh all 11. Um so the the deficiencies were um around around no mandatory staff reporting, no investigation procedure, no appeals process, no parent communication and no definition of alternative discipline um even though it is mentioned. So that was what we were um addressing. Um uh our policy also uh doesn't currently define what we mean by school grounds.

Um that was also part of the discussion.

Um uh but um Superintendent Gray I think because he was uh thought he was beating up on us for our earlier work. He did say, and this is the word he used, that our policy was superior uh in a num in one really important way. Uh and that had to do with um uh the way we were addressing uh language around uh gender and sex. Um and so, uh that uh remains um that I'm think I'm going to pause there.

Uh anything else uh on that? Okay. So, anything else? Anything that jumped out um to folks?

Kelly, I did have your note around some of the replication of language um between um the policy and the procedure and we can circle back to that. Um um as I said, that I think came from a desire to just make sure things were super super consistent because um in some of the pol in some of the procedure and policies, they were super super not. Um so, we wanted to make sure they were.

Any other thoughts or reflections?

I was trying to um wrap my brain around uh page two in sort of that big section three there.

Bullying and cyber bullying defined. So bullying includes but is not limited to a written, oral or electronic expression or a physical act or gesture or any combination thereof directed at a student or students that one. So basically one is uh physical or fear of physical harm, right? Two is interferes with u accessing their education. So fear, intimidation, hostile educational environment, right? So one is physical, two is more psychological I guess or three is based on perceived characteristics.

So the the or I'm trying to come up with a scenario of what would be three that's bullying but isn't one or two because it feels like physical, psychological or anything related to protected classes. So like so like what would like I I can't even come up with an example. So I'm a Is my question super unclear? I don't know. I in practical terms, yeah, I think your question is totally valid.

I don't know if it helps. This is basically right out of the statute.

So part of the strength of the revision is that it just mirrors the language of the bullying statute that is was updated a few years ago.

So, and part of actually what prompted this policy to be reviewed is that um last year you reviewed and updated the harassment policy and the older definition the older the existing policy for bullying that we have on the books does not have congruent language about protected classes in it. that's consistent with the new harassment policy. Okay, so that was what originally flagged it for me is like, oh, we should at least have this be consistent with the harassment policy in that regard. And then we did the deeper dive around all of the other statuto the updated statutory requirements for the bullying policy.

So here so here's my here's my example and the way I read this this is considered bullying according to this policy.

You are 12 years old.

If I send you an email that say or I tell tell you that you are 12 years old.

I have now done an oral expression except age is not listed.

It is eight. It is actually distinguishing personal characteristics.

I'm only I'm only going to I'm not going to stop you but I'm just going to say that I just I just brought up the uh legislature and that language is just exactly drawn from that.

But the or or or or or is exactly what it is. So again, uh, so I'm I'm fine being in in in compliance with the law because, you know, I'm I'm a rule follower. But does that seem weird to anyone?

Am I am I misreading the law that like if I tell you you're 12 years old, I am now bullying you and can be can be punished accordingly?

Yeah, Kelly, what are you saying?

Well, it's I mean based on something that has to be physically harming or perceived as physically harming like no that's that's it's or so it's physically harming or psychologically harming or related to any characteristic about you. Th this might be a simplification but essentially like the word bullying is not repeated in uh one two or three.

I think it's implied that this is This is the definition of bullying. It has to fit into one of those. So the way I read this, if it if anything I say falls into item three, that is considered bullying.

So anything specific to your personal characteristics, including your age, I I don't disagree with you. I think my point my the point I'm trying to make, I think, uh we'll see uh is that um like two would apply to that, too. Like there's nothing that says bullying in two. It's just you're interfering, but you're creating an intimidating or a hostile environment, right? Like that feels like bullying.

So if you if you keep reading B, so 3B, um, a student's association with a person with one or more of these actual or perceived characteristics or any other distinguishing characteristics and that has the effect described in sub paragraph one or two above. Okay. Is that clarifying? Yes. Okay.

Yeah, good call. Cara identified and is associated with Okay.

All right. So, then you're back to the causing physical harm or intimidating hostile. I'm not sure why we have two A's there, though. For B A students, sh I love that you actually added the second A. Like, it's not like it was already there. You added that and underlined it in both.

It's really important. It's really important A. Um, yeah. I think that I think Cara solved it. I think maybe the only other thing I would add to that is probably if we sort of go deep into that from a couple of different different perspectives, it's sort of like um if the victim if the victim feels bullied then they are bullied and it's not it's not raising questions around what it is about. Um, and so again, I think I think that's where if you start I think if we start saying well age like age then we can start saying well like hairstyle really you know like it's sort of like anything that the individual that fits into this. So I I think it's I think that's also the logic is that it's not like we don't get to choose or the bully doesn't get to choose um which are the which are the appropriate characteristics that they can be bullied for is it would be sort of my interpretation if I'm correct hairstyle is actually specifically mentioned no I know no that's why I mentioned it yeah no that's why I mentioned it but that's where so like again if we sort of start picking them out and say well how could you possibly bully somebody about this probably I mean my point was was like it didn't say it had to have any I mean or or or was like there was no necessarily negative impact of saying I think it was just that that extra line being on the next page was easy to miss. Okay. Yeah, I think I'm good. No, but good call. I'm glad you glad you brought that up, Michelle. That's really important that we talked about that. Thank you. Uh yeah, Valerie, just to button it up in my mind. I'm perceiving the third point to be kind of akin to what somebody might frame for themselves as teasing another friend.

Whereas the friend might feel negatively impacted. It might not be that they are physically harming or threatening.

They don't meet these criteria. But yeah, I mean again the I mean this again the language we're using is drawn from the statute. Um, so again, we we could we could muck around with it and alter it.

I'm not suggesting No, no. I'm just But I'm saying we we have the we just to always just so everybody's clear, we always have the right um as a school board to mess around with language and we can change language that is against statute. We can do that. We're just going to get our ass sued. Um so we can do that. Um so just to be very clear like if we don't like something we can take we can take it out or we could do that but then we would be um opening ourselves up for liability and there are school boards that are currently being sued and yeah let's not do that I'm just trying to figure out for myself what what could be yeah I don't I couldn't take you down that particular rabbit wonderful so I was curious about the examples you guys included those were all new ads um did those come from sample policies okay I mean a lot of them make a ton of sense, right? You know, involuntary loans, donations, extortion. Um the one that I thought um I I was wondering maybe from a principal perspective um the including but not limited to gossip, spreading rumors or social exclusion.

So, I'm curious if, you know, if I could make a bullying claim for my child because someone didn't want to play with them. Like, is that is that is that what this means? Is that what principles expect to see? Am I oversimplifying? So the answer is you you could okay you'd have to demonstrate the effect and then just because something is labeled bullying we still have an array of options for how to attend to it. Okay.

So, it could be as simple as, you know, when you invite everybody in your class but this one little girl to your party, your birthday party, that's exclusion.

And, you know, you can offer a path to, you know, reset things or make amends or depending on the circumstance, you could have a more serious consequence.

Okay.

Yeah. I yeah I think that what you're speaking to there is that is it is it kicks it over to the procedure and then it's then we have these procedures to say it does just because something just because someone is accused of something does not mean it automatically is that thing um like as handed down by some uh divine entity. It's like it then it then goes through a process um or sorry it goes through a procedure uh to determine uh the n the nature of that thing. um period.

It does equip you with language to be able to talk to kids about when you do that, when you are rumor-mongering about this one person or when you are purposefully excluding them, it's actually bullying. Yeah. It's even here in the definition. Gotcha. Okay.

Other thoughts?

Um, Kelly, should we circle back to your um redundancy? That'd be great, Colin. Thank you.

Um, all right. Can you take Sorry, I've just been lost in I'm lost in yellow.

Could you just take me to the um the I guess where it would appear.

Well, in either I believe it's starting with section five, six, seven, possibly beyond that to eight. All right. So, uh so in the reporting reporting, responding and yes, remediation in both the policy and the procedure, right?

Um, yeah, it's repeated. Um, I mean, I think what we could what we would uh Does it fit more in one than the other? I don't know.

Or does it make sense to keep it into both in general? In general, my understanding from folks is that you the the policies wherever possible should uh if something's going to be more general, it will be the policy because it gives the administration more uh room. So if you if you are not trying to directly mandate something um goes a certain way, um you leave that out of the policy. Um, but I'm not sure how we would change that to be more general. I'm looking Cara and Chris for if they have any musings on on how we might change that.

Um, again like uh uh is it elegant? No. Does it have any substantive impact on on what anybody's experience of bullying or of having to try it be of having to have it be addressed?

uh got lost in that sentence. Would it have any impact on that process? No, it wouldn't. So, um I think keeping it doesn't substantively impact anyone.

Honestly, these sections to me feel more like procedures than they do policies.

Well, we're actually referencing the procedure, right? Like the form.

Yeah. I suppos I suppose one thing we could do if we re if we really wanted to we could take out all of the language in all of them and it would just say five reporting refer to the reporting form gickei we could just take out all that that is like that would be a very straightforward um thing but I think then what we are saying to uh let's say Maria um uh bring is wants to it wants it goes to this page and and she wants to figure out like whether or not something has happened like we're kicking her from that into another document and so like why not tell her right here this is how reporting works would be one possible argument but I am agnostic on this matter going once going twice yeah I mean I would agree with that I think that if we can keep that in there. I I would prefer to keep it in.

I heard a preference. I heard a preference from Cara and I like that preference. Uh let's run with that preference is what I say because we've got a lot of work to do and it's serious work. And also there's the closing roads down for some reason that I don't understand. Is it snowing? I think they're moving the old snow.

They're moving the old snow. Okay. Um I did have one more question. Let's do it.

Sorry. Uh page three under cyber bullying. um text messaging device and personal digital assistant. Do do people still have PDAs? Do we need to include this?

Why are you you're hazing right now is what you were doing.

I mean, if we're trying to update this to the current century, maybe we don't need that. But I'm fine. Just curious.

I don't know, man. I don't have I don't have any I don't have a pony in that race. Uh anybody want to want to keep that or take it out? What do you think, Maria?

No bullying people with your with your Palm Pilot? I mean, your daughter, do you even know what a palm pilot is, Maria?

Also, your daughter wants a Walkman and a Palm Pilot. Yeah, we can take it. Uh, no, it's fine. I was just curious. We can't again if that would make everybody to bully because it's not saying they can't use them. It's just saying they can you could cyber bully with it. It's a fair point.

I think you're going to get cyber bullied by it. It's going to It's going to It's going to bring someone joy. Okay, there you go.

To encounter that, Maria's gonna find it and she and she's just gonna be like, "What is that?" and like just like discover so many interesting things.

Okay. So, um uh are you doing the procedure separately or are we Oh, sorry. No, they're uh together.

The procedure it was bundled and it flows from it.

They're not any Yeah. All the same principles that I outlined of why we are changing it apply to the procedure as well as the policy.

So this is first read. Um so you will have another chance in a in a month or so to look at this again. Um I'm definitely going to find a PDA.

We can talk about Palm Pilots uh but all but in all seriousness this is a um I mean this is a very difficult policy.

That's that's partially why we spent so long on it. Um because we really wanted to make sure that we were getting it right and we were looking at and again um kudos to Superintendent Gray for really sort of making sure that we were um understanding the most recent language but also understanding what parts uh we could keep because they were awesome.

So all 11 requirements are now in here. Yes. Great.

All right. Any other questions or comments?

So, we have a first and a second on the floor for both the policy and the procedure. Yes.

I believe it was Chris and Anna, right? Thank you. I even remembered who it was. All right. Um, all those in favor?

None opposed. Thank you. All right.

So we are skipping 12A and we are moving on to 12B which is the second read for the calendar. So uh do I have a motion for consideration approval for the second read of the 2627 school calendar Karen and Steph?

Any changes from the last one we saw?

No. Okay. I don't think we were requesting any. So, just want to make sure nothing had changed from then till now.

Any comments, questions? Great. All those in favor? None opposed.

All right.

Now, we get down to the fun stuff. All right. I will hand it over to Superintendent Gray for item 13A, presentation of the superintendent's 2627 proposed budget.

Take a quick minute to get set up here.

What version of I uh one of my favorite poems by Robert H called Meditation of Laggonas. I taught it a number of years ago and the final line of the the final line of the poem uh is blackberry, blackberry, blackberry. And when I taught it at NYU, um the students were like, why is he talking about his blackberry? Cuz they that was current uh for them. I guess that means I've been teaching for a while. Uh but that really has turned that poem on its head for me.

here. How are you?

Sam, which screen mirroring is it? 238.

I have a 248. Show more.

Oh, there it is. Yeah. Okay.

Oh, that's a weird color.

Okay. I mean, it is what it is.

All right. Well, let's try it again. Oh, I think that does look better.

Yeah.

Are we all here? Are we all here?

I think okay, I think we're all here. So, let's launch in.

I brought it up here. There's I had another one behind me, but thank you. Yeah, it was a little dry. Could you tell? That That honestly is what did it.

Okay. Okay. Well, thank you everybody. So, Mr. Pitten, okay, so thank you everybody. I've had a little more water now, so hopefully you'll be able to hear me well.

Um, a great deal of care has gone into this presentation. I'm really glad Sam was able to get the colors to work because as Kelly and Erica can testify, we actually had a lot of conversation about colors in a certain part of this.

Um, they're very relevant to the way the information is presented. Um, so first I just want to start with the history of how we got to this moment.

Um, back in November, the board gave direction that they wanted to see three tiers of a budget. And so we are presenting the budget differently from the way we have in the past. In the past, each administrator would come forward and share a presentation about their own cost center. Um my aim in doing it all together as the superintendent's budget is to give a sense that this is one district moving forward that the cost centers are not in competition with each other and that in fact we have talked about this as a team very thoroughly and that is a true statement. We have really approached it as a team and uh I think I can say with fairness that the whole group behind me understands this budget has thoroughly talked about it and there is strong consensus behind it. So it's got my name on it and I'm standing up here but it was definitely a group process and I'm very appreciative of that.

So you're going to see three budget presentations and tonight's presentation will lay out the big picture first. So that means it will lay out the three different tiers that you have asked for which are at six, seven and 8%.

But then it's going to do a deeper dive on the recommended level which is the level I am recommending and that is the 7% level, the middle level. And I'll do my best to explain why I'm recommending that level.

So the context, as I explained at the onset of this school year, if we carry forward a status quo budget, mean meaning if we take everything we're currently funding and carry it forward, it will be an increase of just over 10% over last year.

there. The cost drivers for that are the contracts that we have. We have multiple special education costs that are to meet individual student IEP needs. Um transportation and other operations and health insurance and other fixed costs.

So, not everybody, if you're not a school finance wonk like some of us, um it may not be readily apparent, but just because the budget goes forward at 10% over last year, that is not necessarily the way it impacts taxes in each community. The taxes in each community are based on a cost sharing formula for each town. And it may mean they will not be equal. they may be substantially more depending on which town you're in.

Um, so a status quo budget going forward at 10% over last year is a significantly higher increase than previous years. And I do have a slide to explain that as well. Um, but that was what I brought to you back in November and asked for direction about. Um, so you'll see more detail about how that shakes down. I wanted to start by saying that we do have some additions to the budget beyond the status quo budget that are included tonight.

I've broken those into necessary additions and recommended additions.

Necessary additions are those that basically the board has already voted to approve.

So, for example, we have special ed needs for a full-time speech language pathologist, a half-time teacher of the deaf, and other costs for out of district placements for kids who have that indicated in their IEPs.

Um, we are currently paying for some of that right now for those kids out of reserve money, but we need to put that in the budget for next year. reserve money is something to use on a one-time only basis.

Um, we also have energy audit and vehicle replacement uh plans already that are phasing in important like energy efficiencies for our buildings and keeping our vehicle fleets updated so that if we had a bus breakdown or uh a bus come to the end of its life dramatically just because it gets old and worn out, then we aren't all of a sudden having to immediately tax our way out of that problem. we have a way to level out the tax impact of that over time. Um, there were are also included in the budget funds for a board approved sbatical leave that you all approved recently.

So, those are necessary because you've already voted for those. The recommended additions are things you have not voted for yet, but I'm hoping that you will.

Most of these come out as a wash in the budget, but I wanted to include them anyway for transparency.

So, first is summer school at Mor Street School. Um, this is a very small amount of money. It's $7,000 basically. And last year it was in title one. We are not able, we don't know what will happen with title money right now. And if title money goes through in the way that we hope it will, we won't even have an answer for that until April. So given the small amount of money and given the necessity really to have summer school at all of our schools, um it's important that we put this amount in the budget. I'm also requesting uh that we add a stipen for middle school swimming which is about $2,400 which I would call in the overall context of a $40 million budget a very small amount to serve about I think Eric you said it was about 50 kids who are currently doing this through community programs but are there's strong demand for this. It's a lifetime sport. It's good for kids. $2,400 seemed like a reasonable thing to add.

Um there are some additions for facilities maintenance, painting, and carpet replacements. Although you will see later that we have um scaled back the original ask in terms of the overall context of this budget. We do want to carry forward with some of that because we don't want our facilities to get too far behind.

Um, we are recommending some replacements for devices, technology devices and audiovisisual replacements. Although, as you will see later, we're significantly scaling back the ask on that and thinking about uh punting that to another year basically given what we are up against in the overall picture of the budget.

Um, I'm asking for money for a facilities study, which is to really examine a long-term plan to make sure that we are going forward sustainably.

There will be a lot more about what that plan would be on February 11th, two weeks from now. Um, the cost of that study we're including in the budget, what we're going to offset it by recommending that it come out of capital reserve because it is a one-time expense. So that would be a net zero impact on the budget right now.

Um and we are also looking at providing some what I would call desperately needed support to the transportation department which is a half-time administrative assistant to Jeremy. Um however we're going to offset that in central office by the reduction of a halftime bookkeeper. This is basically assigning staff new roles. So it shows up in the budget as an addition and a reduction that are equal. And for transparency, we want to show that. So it's budget neutral. So the necessary additions in the top add up to $87,000 roughly.

The recommended additions add up to $154,818.

And between the two of them, that is roughly 2% of the budget. In the $40 million budget, each percentage point is $400,000 roughly.

I want to talk a little bit about how we have approached this and I hope that some of this will jog memory because I've tried to be very purposeful in communicating about our approach to the budget this year.

started out early by acquainting all the stakeholders I could think of with what the overall picture of the budget was.

Um then very deliberately asked staff for their feedback in listening sessions and also with a survey. We took the results of that listening sessions and survey and considered them strongly as an administrative team. We met extremely frequently as administrative team. As I mentioned earlier in my remarks, we've more than doubled the amount of time that we have met to consider the budget.

Um, and I came to you for guidance in November, um, when it was clear that we needed to have consensus around this and a way to go forward.

A reminder of that what that direction was. You asked to see three tiers, an 8%, a 7%, and a 6%.

The tiers I'm giving you are actually each slightly under those respective numbers. So the 8% tier is 7 point something. The six the 7% is 6 point something. The 6% is 5 point something.

The reason for that is that we don't know yet what the state subsidy is going to be.

Um, the big picture is that if we went all the way to the deepest level, that is $1.8 million roughly.

And if you're kind of doing some math in your head, if the status quo budget is just over 10%.

And we wanted to go to even the least disruptive tier, which is 8%. Well, that's about half of $1.8 million.

So that's about a million dollars just to get to the top tier.

And it's not in the slideshow, but I will remind you of a just a statistic from earlier presentations that the the budget the amount of the overall budget that is represented by staffing and Kelly correct me if I'm wrong on this.

It's roughly 80ish% of the budget.

So to bring in a budget at those tiers there really is we have uh I will emphasize we looked at non-staffing areas first and we did a lot of work on that and you will see that show up but you can't get to that level of decrease without touching the 80% of the budget that is staffing.

So all three tiers do indicate staffing reductions.

So here, this is a summary of what we did before we looked at staffing to try to minimize that.

We asked all schools and departments to hold their budgets to essential levels.

And I've got to tell you, they really did.

Jen just shared a spreadsheet with me today about what her departments did, she and her departments did to bring down their non-staffing costs, supplies, etc.

They came the the difference from previous years is stark. They really really paid attention to this in every building.

We looked at our facilities and maintenance costs.

I it would not be smart to just decide as I have seen school districts do in the past to just completely not attend to ongoing maintenance. that is setting us up to have real problems later. But we did look at what do we have to do and what do we not have to do right now and we have made reductions where we don't have to do things right now.

Those are mo mostly co cosmetic things like paint and carpets.

Um we have referred defer we have deferred technology updates. Part of the reason that it makes sense to do that now is that ideally we would love to get our devices on a replacement cycle similar to our bus fleet. Um but the truth is at this very moment we just don't have to do that and Apple is giving us an option to continue leasing at 0% interest. So that is what makes the most sense for us to do right now.

We're also able to make a pretty significant reduction to our school nutrition contribution um without at all compromising the quality of the meals that we're offering to kids. And you'll see more about that in a separate presentation. But the biggest reason for this is that we are the state gives us an amount that we can't exceed um for school nutrition and we have been consistently over the amount that we have sitting in our school nutrition bank account and we've been finding creative ways to spend that money because the state has been telling us to. So we can reduce the amount that we as a district are contributing to school nutrition right now and still not impact the what kids are getting to eat.

Um and as I mentioned before, I am suggesting that we move a facility study, which we really do need to do, to capital reserve because that's a one-time expense or at least it's a once a once a generation expense hopefully.

So, as I mentioned, I'm presenting three tiers.

The tier that I'm recommending is the middle tier, what I'm calling tier 2. It comes in at roughly 7% increase over last year.

And the reason that I'm recommending that tier is because I think our work in approaching this budget is to position the district to be able to make good long-term decisions.

Some of those long-term decisions are about early childhood. Some of them are about um the way the way our facilities are planned as we go forward. Some of them are about programming that we may need in the future. We need to be able to address those in a responsible and um and a deaf way.

So tier 2 makes real reductions now, but they are reductions that keep intact our core program core programming that honor our existing class- size policy across the board and ensure that we are still providing a rust robust education.

Um and tier 2 does importantly avoid deferring decisions that if they don't get made now will come back later at another point.

So now I'd like to talk about enrollment for a little bit.

So this is next year's projected enrollment broken down by grade level and you have it in front of you in paper obviously as well. This is a slight decrease from this year.

While we're not projecting massive decreases in enrollment in the immediate future, neither are we predicting increases in enrollment.

So this is the historical enrollment just so that you have some context.

In 2023, we were at 284 students. In 2024, that was reduced by almost 100 students to 1997.

2025, that's this year, we lost 20 more.

Next year, is predicted to be about the same.

But the general trend for this area is slight down ticks.

So this is where we get down to the brass tax.

So, this is the overview of reductions that I would recommend if we were to go to tier one, which is the least amount of reducing right now. That's at 8%.

I'm sure I don't need to read them out to you, but I want to sort of point out some of the patterns and some of the major decision points.

One thing that may stand out to you right away is that the ele there are the fewest reductions in the elementary schools.

The reasons for that is that the elementary schools honestly have the least amount of room for reduction right now.

Bringing those uh those three positions put our elementary class sizes at the upper upper end of our guidance for class sizes and I wouldn't want to go beyond that.

where there is more availability to reduce and be well within class size limits is at the middle and high school level.

Uh particularly at Freeport Middle School. Um, at Freeport Middle School, Pam and Bill have done a really great job at looking how to make the schedule more efficient, and they have a plan for how to do that, which enables not only some efficiencies, but also some real, I think, opportunities for improved instruction. For example, we can by adjusting that schedule, we can make sure that all kids there are getting social studies as a core class, which they're getting um in a rotation right now.

We can also make sure that all kids get all kids get a world language by adjusting that schedule.

There are some trade-offs. And one of the trade-offs that's up there that we really thought long and hard about was the uh proposed reduction of the French position at Freeport Middle School.

The reasoning behind that is that we knew that in order to do reductions there, we needed to look at the unified arts um the specials and to think about the ways that we could approach that with the least impact.

So if we reduce the French position there, it creates congruence with what is offered at Durham, which is Spanish.

And another way that it creates congruence with what's offered at Durham is that at Durham, yes, there's only one choice for language, but every kid is getting it. It's required.

And at Freeport Middle School, that is not the case.

um languages are offered there as uh choices for unified arts as well as JMG and what else Pam?

Yes. Okay.

So by con concentrating on just Spanish we can make sure that every kid gets exposure to world language.

at the high school. Um, you see reductions up there that are driven by the least impact to students based on numbers.

The department at the high school that has the most opportunity to reduce and be in line with where other departments are for class sizes is math.

And in addition at the high school in the world language department we currently offer Spanish, French and Latin. We have one Spanish teacher. We have one French teacher who also teaches some Spanish. And we have two Latin teachers. And by reducing one Latin teacher, we can still maintain all three languages.

And in addition to that, we have a printing clerk position which is part-time which we can absorb.

And we have a full-time community outreach coordinator who does fantastic work, but we can reduce that position to halftime and still have a robust community outreach program.

And then districtwide, we have three ESOL teachers. English is a second language teacher.

Our numbers of students who are multilingual have dropped over the past few years and the need for three teachers is just not congruent with the number of students we have who need the service and the amount of service that they need.

And in addition to that, at this tier, I'm also recommending some s significant non-staff reductions, uh, deferring painting and carpets, um, cutting the school nutrition contribution by half, and reducing $125,000 of device replacements.

and before I go on to the next tier, I want to come back to a point I made um in my opening remarks.

This is the moment where it's very easy to look and natural to look at where we're proposing where I'm proposing to reduce the background for every single one of those is okay what do we need to keep what is not written up there but what does reducing here mean we can maintain and to me the things I kept coming back to are in the elementary schools the class sizes were already high. We can reduce a little there, but we can't reduce a lot without really compromising class sizes.

And that's a perspective that we've kept coming back to. And we also really need to keep providing for special education because the needs in special education are just continuing to increase.

So when viewed that way, this proposal does not mean it truly does not mean we don't value having that additional math teacher at the high school. It doesn't mean we don't value having a French program at Freeport Middle School. It means that when viewed against all of the things we feel we need to m maintain, these are where we feel we can find an efficiency to maintain really important things.

Moving on to the next tier. This is the tier that I recommend. And what you see in blue are additional items that would be added on to what's in red to get to this level.

So if you look at the top at the elementary and middle level, you see five edtech positions.

The good news is that we currently have five and a half open edtech positions in the district.

The open edtech positions we have are in special ed.

So the individuals who are currently in those positions, we can offer another position to that is that's currently vacant.

Additionally, at that level, I am recommending that we reduce to two um instructional strategists at the K to5 level.

We presently have three.

And then last, you'll see under non-staff next to device replacement a little blue times two. This means that at this level, I'm recommending that we completely defer the device replacement.

Um that together that's a quarter of a million dollars.

So now I'm going to go on to tier three.

And I want to make it really clear when I go on to tier three that it's in red for a reason. and that there are big words in capitals at the top, not recommended.

This is what we would have to do to get this deep.

We really had to think outside of the box. Now, one of the schools that you have not seen mentioned until tier three is Powell. And that's simply because the size Pel is, it makes it very hard to reduce a whole position. If you're talking about like you're going to have to have a first grade classroom, it's not like Mass Landing where there are several third grade classrooms and you can sort of spread the impact in a small school. Those those impacts are magnified.

So we have a few positions at Powell that we could reduce if we need to, but I don't recommend it. We have two edtech positions. One is an RTIA edtech at 0.9.

The other is an RTIB edtech at 0 4.

Those odd 0.9 and point 4 are because those individuals actually fill their time doing some other things. Uh the 0.9 person spend some time in the in the kitchen. The point four person Kelly reminds me bus driver. So um those are the impacts of those are more difficult to deal with.

We did some creative thinking and realized that at Pel next year there are supposed to be 18 fifth graders.

Well, Mass Landing could absorb 15 eighth graders and spread it out over the classrooms there and still be within the class size policy. We could send the pal fifth graders to masked landing. I don't recommend it for any number of reasons.

one is what it implies for the pel school and second there's a whole transportation pro puzzle there that we honestly don't have the answer to right now we would figure it out somehow but it involves start times and having a driver and lots of stuff and could we do it well if we have to we can but it it's a puzzle um at the middle level to go this far we could reduce another unified arts position at Freeport Middle School and it would be possible to reduce the health position and embed the health standards in other schools in other disciplines like PE, social studies, science. Um, at Durham they have a wellness position that's K to8 and they have um they have embedded those standards in other subjects in the past.

But it's much better to have that position.

And then last at the high school um we could reduce a half social work position.

That position is serving such a need and students mental health is of such concern right now. Um that is all I can say is I don't recommend doing that.

But if the board wanted to go to that level, this is how we would get there.

So again, I'm going to come back to tier two and and explain why I think this is the best way forward.

The first bullet is really the most important.

If we defer hard decisions now, it means harder decisions later.

There's also a legitimate question out out there about what level of budget increase the community will support. I don't I'm not from here. I don't have a crystal ball to that.

All I can tell you, and we do have information about this, is that the past two years in a row, you had budget increases of roughly 6%.

Going to 10% is a huge leap and going back before that, the budget increases were much lower than 6%.

Um, we all know we're living in a time of really increasing cost of living. people in the community are feeling that we have people whose tax bills are rapidly increasing.

We have to consider that and I I need to make a good faith recommendation to you about what I'm confident the community will support and which positions us again to really be in a a strong place going forward for the decisions that come next year, the year beyond, etc.

So some of the key impacts at tier 2 again the fewest reductions at the elementary level and that's where the individual student needs are the greatest.

It maintains core programming at all the elementary schools.

at the middle level there. That's the biggest change. Um, but Pam and Bill and I I really feel that the new schedule actually is an opportunity that it will enhance the program there. Um, we certainly had rich discussion about unified arts, French and health and how to approach those. And another aspect of that that I will mention that doesn't have a budgetary impact but has um an impact on school culture is bringing in library as uh a special which it currently is not and really using that as a place to teach about digital citizenship, cell phone use, etc.

Um, and we do have the opportunity at the middle level at Freeport Middle School to reduce the office staff at a level that's consistent with other schools. Right now, we have two full-time office staff at Freeport Middle School. Freeport Middle School has the same number of kids roughly as Mass Landing. Mass Landing has one full-time assistant and I think 0.15 that drops in from is not always there.

Um, so it seems to make sense to bring that in line at the secondary level. I mean, I was a high school teacher for a long time.

Those are really hard to think about.

But when I think about the reduction in math, which will be very deeply felt, but it brings that department in line with other departments, and I can't in good faith, if I look at where else we go, I'm looking at elementary schools. I can't in good faith bring forward a proposal that creates that kind of imbalance.

So with these proposals at the high school, the math department can be in line with other departments. Um we can still maintain offerings in all three existing world languages.

um and choosing the printing clerk position and the community outreach position for reduction um allows us to maintain core academic programming in other places.

So my belief and I I believe the team behind me strongly supports this is that when we look at it through equity among the schools, this is the way forward that meets that CR that checks that box box the best.

So if we look at class sizes and what they would be projected at at the recommended level, this is what it looks like.

So there are a few places where it's up above 20, but by and large it's below 20.

Those are those are healthy class sizes.

So, just a few things about what this proposal does not include.

Early childhood still a big question mark.

Um, next week I will be bringing forward something to you with an answer about how we would step into that if we would step into that without impacting the local taxpayers. I don't feel that it's the right I I'll just go on record now.

I don't feel it's the right time to impact the local taxpayers with that expense given the overall gestalt of what we're doing here. And there are certain programs that are they have a different funding structure and so they will be presented separately.

They are included in the amount that I've shown you. But in terms of showing you how those programs work, we have I haven't gotten into the specifics. And those are community programs, school nutrition, and region 10.

And if you look at my recommended budget by article, this is these are how the increases go forward.

You can see the biggest is in special education and that's because of those special situations that I mentioned.

Um the the others are well all well below the overall budget increase trend that we have seen.

And these are the rest.

So this is the level that we're calling a 7% increase. It's really as of right now it's at 6.46 to leave some wiggle room for the state subsidy which may not be what it was last year.

So next week I will talk more about the highest and lowest tiers. You have that information in front of you to think about the staff who had would be affected by all of the tiers have been um have been talked to.

Um, next week we'll present community programs and school nutrition. And I am determined we will talk about early childhood cohort three finally. And then on February 11th, you have asked for a concept for longer term sustainability and that um we do have a concept to share. It is it is a concept. It's not it's not fully fleshed out. It's an idea.

Um, and we will have an update about strategic planning. That process has been moving forward and we'll have plenty of time for questions and discussion.

So, as I close, um, I said a couple months ago, this is hard work, but it's good work.

It's hard conversations and hard decisions, but that's that is good work to be doing as long as it's done with transparency and integrity. Um, I cannot emphasize enough how impressive the people behind me have been. um particularly as a new superintendent, they've been extremely helpful and the staff have been gracious and patient and the staff have at at all points when we've been communicating, staff have been respectful of what we're dealing with.

And now I have a lot of empathy for everyone who is going to now for a period of time, weeks, await decisions.

It's hard to sit with discomfort.

Thank you. If there are questions, I'll I'll go up there to take them.

Thank you. Um, clearly a ton of work goes into this presentation every year.

Um, and pretty sure I can speak for the whole board when I say we appreciate the thoughtful process you guys undertook this year. Um, and I certainly don't mean to um downplay the work that's been done in prior years because I do believe that has always been presented as a as a superintendent's budget with the support of the full administrative team. Um, but there are certainly some new components to the to the process this year, including the the staff surveys and listening sessions and all key to getting a kind of a full view of of impact. And um I really appreciated um and while I'm I'm sure this was always at the heart of of these hard decisions in the past, but really coming back to not just, you know, what are we looking to to potentially eliminate, but what are we protecting and saving? Um and what, you know, at our core do we want to make sure we we we keep. Um so I appreciate that that perspective um that runs through the whole presentation.

Um, I know you've have a different model for how we're presenting this going forward. Historically, this first sort of top view of of everything um is is a lot of information and the board usually will take some time to process that and come back with questions. Um, we don't typically have a a ton of discussion after this first one. It's more taking it, going back, thinking on it. Um, I guess my question is, um, while we have the full administrative team here, uh, is the expectation that they will be at the all of our budget meetings going forward. So, if we have specific questions, we will have access to those answers.

They are on the hook. Sorry, guys.

Um, okay. Um, I guess I will open it up to board members at this point to just, you know, any clarifying questions um that people feel like they need before they can even really dive in and start digging through the information we have from tonight.

Chris, so this was something we talked about in the finance meeting beforehand, but could you kind of just walk us through, especially because I didn't know this before we talked about this, but when when you propose, as an example, a a DCS grade one position, it is not necessarily a teacher that happens to be currently residing in that in that position.

That's correct. So the the shorter answer is that the person who's in the positions that are listed may very well not be the person who is ultimately uh who loses a job. And the reason for that is the way that the contract is laid out. And um if I try to summarize that I'll summarize it for for teachers basically there are two uh lists in order of of like seniority. The first list is a probationary list and if a position is to be reduced you looked at the probationary list first.

Probationary people are in their first or second year and then if well I need to back up. It's also broken down by impact area. So for example, high school, secondary social studies is an impact area. Secondary math is an impact area. K to5 teaching is an impact area.

So for example, the there's a a math teacher, there's a secondary math teacher, the position is suggested to be reduced. The way that we have to find who the individual is that that would directly affect is first look at the probationary list. Is there anyone in that impact area who is on the probationary list?

And if there's more than one person on the probationary list, the contract establishes a system of points that we have to use to determine that. And the factors that go into the points are your date of hire, um how many certifications you have, how many degrees you have, and your evaluations.

And so that's true on the probationary list, and it's then true on the seniority list. Once you go through your first two years, you move off the probationary list onto the continuing contract list, which is called the seniority list. And it's based on points as laid out by the contract. And if there's a tie in points between two individuals, then that you go to the next criterion, which is in the contract, and that's the date of hire.

And so what that means is if we reduce a an elementary teaching position in any of the schools, that's the biggest impact area. So you are first looking at the probationary list to see which elementary teachers districtwide are on the probationary list. And then if there were was nobody on the probationary list, you'd look at the other list, the continuing contract list. But it's not necessarily the person who's in the position you're suggesting to reduce.

It's the person who is has the fewest points in that impact area.

And I'll also point out that um in any year there is a a typical number of turnover in positions in teaching as well. We have retirements, we have people that move, we have people that switch districts. So, it's also fair to say that it doesn't necessarily mean that the the number of FTEEs that we're looking at here, all of those would result in having to go to those lists and and physically um you know, a reduction in force per the contract, right? That's correct. I mean, we already know, for example, we at an earlier meeting, I think it was December, we announced a a retirement of a first grade teacher at Mor Street School. So that's a position that will be available, right? So that would be one less person of those three elementary teachers that are on tier 2.

That doesn't necessarily mean that the first grade position would be available.

It means that that one person in that impact area has already made a retirement decision.

So another position within that impact area could be could be available available. Right.

care.

I also want to thank you for your transparency throughout this whole process and how thorough the presentations have been all along the way. So, thank you and thank all of you for your time on this. And like Michelle said, doesn't mean that we don't think you put that time in last time last years, but it's been really helpful to fully understand it. Uh, and I'm wondering if you could walk us through the state subsidy uh, process and if you have a sense if there's any way you have a sense if that might come through higher than we think or lower than we think.

I may I may tap Kelly for this, but I don't predict it will be higher just because our enrollment is a little lower and the state subsidy is based on um the number of kids that we have. And then it's also based on some of those kids are weighted more heavily depending upon whether they're special education, an English language learner, and several other categories. But the state has a matrix that they use that then determines what our subsidy would be.

And in addition to that, you may recall that um the governor has made a promise that the state will fund 55% of public education. But that doesn't mean 55% of public education in each district. It means statewide. And so districts that have basically fewer resources are getting more. And we're a district that has relatively ample resources. So we're getting less. And then the other aspect of that, just I think everybody probably here knows that, but most districts out there feel that the amount that the state says it requires to educate a student is dramatically insufficient, which is why we're, you know, talking about going to our local taxpayers for more money than what the state allocates.

Yeah. And just sort of in terms of the cycle of the the biionial process and Kelly will jump up if I say anything completely out of left field. Um but this is the the first year of the new budget, right? So last year we kind of had a sense because they had passed the two-year budget, so we kind of knew what we didn't know the very specifics, but um yes, for the state, sorry. Um I I don't think we're going to know that anytime soon. Um, so we don't know what will actually like what the total pot of available money is, never mind how much would then come to us.

Superintendent were talking about this yesterday. Yeah.

Um, you know, everybody's awaiting this information with baited breath. Part of what is holding it up, I believe, is that there are some districts who have gosh, for whatever reason, not made their decision about whether to enter cohort three.

and entering cohort three affects your subsidy because of will your prek kids be in one pot of money or in another pot of money. So yeah, which is sort of counter to what they had originally said anyway, that this was separate from the EB279 um which is the the document that tracks what the the EPSO essential programs and services that that's where they say like you know a kiddo in you know each kiddo in this age bracket is worth you know needs this much teachers and this much administrative support and supplies and you know special ed gets a little bit more and um ESOL students Um, but basically all of those add up to what they say it costs to educate the 1,971 kids in our district. Um, that's the EPS piece, right? And then the subsidy is actually, okay, this is how much they say it costs. I would agree that it's woefully less. You know, there's no there's no sports, there's no extracurriculars, there's, you know, art and music not required. Um, but so anyway, so but essential what they consider essential programs and services. And then so that's the that's one number and then your subsidy is actually that number minus how much the state says you have to put into the pot um based on your valuation that the state sets for all three towns and states and sets for all towns in in the state. So um the the difference between those numbers is what we actually get in subsidy. So there's a ton of numbers that go into that. Um, you know, usually we don't have subsidy numbers. I think in a good year until sometime in February. Um, in a bad year, I I mean, April, I mean, maybe even later, I don't know, before I mean, they have to they have to approve the state budget. Um, and because they need to know how much of for education is there because they don't want to, you know, tell you how much you're going to get if they don't know how much they're going to raise.

So, um I don't I I mean we don't have growing numbers um in terms of students. I think that has saved this district and this board from some of these really hard conversations in the past several years.

We had COVID money that came in that helped sort of, you know, mask some of that. Um and then we had years where we had large bumps in in um in student counts and that, you know, masked it a little bit further. um all of those things have sort of gone away and now we're faced with these difficult conversations that we haven't had to have that but other districts have um already had to have. So um I don't I mean it'd be great if our subsidy came in higher but I would be surprised because we are in a rising valuation market. So if we have the same number of kids and they say we need to pay more because we have higher values than we did um relative to other parts of the state all of that equals less subsidy.

That's my personal opinion. So though our special education increase is significant, would could that impact the weighted? It might maybe if they I mean if they were might we get more in subsidy for the special education needs eventually it but because it lags behind right so when you think of the E279 that they're creating for the 26 27 expenditures they're actually looking at 2425s numbers that they're then putting a multiplication factor on for you. So it will take a little while for that to catch up with us and actually be shown through subsidy.

Steph um yeah just I can feel and appreciate the care that's gone into all of this and it's really helpful when we're making a what feels like a terrible choice. Um so just knowing that that that care and respect is here is really helpful. Um, and then my question is, can you explain to me the nutrition piece and how we don't cut nutrition by not contributing to nutrition? Again, for me, I may tap Kelly and Erica Riley again, but basically school nutrition, the short answer, flag me if I'm getting this wrong. Um, school nutrition is mostly funded by state and federal sources. And so we also have a contribution that we've been making, but there are also rules about how much money we can keep in like a sep. We have a bank account. We have an account for school nutrition and we're only allowed to keep a certain amount and we've been consistently over that amount. So we've been getting letters from the state this year that I've had to sign off on saying you got to spend money. So like we've been spending the money. Um I forget what we're spending it on. like I don't know probably Skittles but you know kidding I was g caviar Skittles um but we Kelly well well you know you did a great job with that Tom um what we have been spending it on is Erica has been updating equipment um within the buildings um there's and then certain pieces of equipment sometime require a little extra ventilation or an electrical you know like an electrical upgrade those types of things the nutrition part department has been taking care of those. Um, as you remember last year we did we did a reduction to this the amount we were contributing to school nutrition. Um, we're we're continuing that reduction because even with reducing our contribution last year, we're still anticipating that um carryover balance being too high. I believe Eric it was three months expenses that you can have in so basically they're taking a formula. they're they're doing you like your three highest months of expenditures and that's what you can legally um have in your um undesated fund balance or carryover. Um so that's that's kind of where we're at. What we looked at when we were um going through the process is how much money actually got basically the amount of our appropriation to the school nutrition account is what was left over at the end of the year and actually increased the fund balance by um if you were just straight straight up look at revenues toward against expenditures what we were contributing as a district was over and above and was adding to it instead of allowing it to spend down. So that's why we didn't completely go to zero and I will be completely honest with that because we it it is very easy to take something out of a budget. It's harder to get something back in, right? And one of the things that that's happening this year is we're negotiating the support staff contract. Um, and Erica is not sitting at the table with the superintendent and ultimately the board, right, when those negotiations are happening. Um, of course, we build a budget and we put some anticipated expenditures in there, but we as the district make the decision as to what those people are making. And so we felt that the contribution that we that is is remaining within school nutrition would be able to absorb some necessary changes in salaries um for the for the for the u staff to be and nutrition and and community programs. Um they're both what we call enterprise funds. So they kind of sit outside of the normal if you call it the profit and loss of the district. Um, so, uh, Kelly and I both remember times when the nutrition program was losing hundreds of thousands of dollars a year.

Um, and the school had to essentially subsidize that and and make a transfer, which is what created what we have in the budget now. And we have reduced that over time. Um, some of that is because, you know, during COVID they changed the funding and how we get money for reimbursed meals and the fact that now all kids are getting breakfast and lunch funded through the state and through the threat of our programs. All of those have sort of increased and I will say our nutrition program has done a great job to increase um participation, right?

So, the more kids that we get to take the meals, the more we get reimbured for the meals and um it's kind it's a win-win scenario. So it, you know, nutrition has become, as Kelly said, essentially a break even um proposition, right? So um we don't have to put as much in there because right now it's it's covering its own expenses because it has different revenue sources.

Other questions, other information that you would like Tom or administrators to come with next time?

Valerie, I want to start by echoing how everybody started with acknowledging and appreciating the amount of work that's been done and the the difference in the way it's presented this year over previous years. I'm not saying one is better than the other. This is just more in my lane of understanding.

Um it's easier for me to comprehend what's being recommended and why. Um, so I really appreciate different methods of teaching are different and sometimes it's easier to understand and this one's good for me, I guess, is the right answer. Um, but my question is, um, as Kelly just alluded, um, we do have a pending, um, contract negotiation, and I'm wondering if we anticipate any changes to these tiers after the negotiations, and if so, how significant those might be.

The the negotiations could impact the overall figure. Uh, one of the reasons that again why we came in under six, seven, and eight is to allow some some wiggle room for that.

Yeah. Again, I'll just echo appreciation for all of the hard work and really uh difficult work and uh and yeah, there's some difficult very difficult choices uh ahead of us. I think one um whatever information could be presented about what we know about coming years um in terms of um in other words um I know we won't know everything about staffing uh for next year and the year after that um but We can I can assume we could make some estimates of like if we maintain current staffing with our with the um uh how that would play out. Um because I think that the emphasis on again very much appreciate the emphasis on sustainability and sort of structural questions. But um I think it would be helpful for me to have a little bit of a sense of like um are we doing this again next year? Um, are we are we effectively doing the same sorts of cuts because of the same sorts of issues? Um, I think that would just be helpful for us to be able to to to know that uh so that we can make some honest decisions about that. Does that make sense, Tom?

It does. And we we can definitely supply that. I I can't remember at what point it was.

Maybe it was in November, but I remember asking Kelly to to look at project not just next year, but the year after that.

And Kelly did run those numbers, and I think we brought them up. Maybe it was like really early on, but we we can we can bring that for sure.

And that may dovetail with some of the, you know, the strategic updates and the concept of a plan. I hate to say that. Sorry.

um um that we're going to hear about on the 11th. Um you know to kind I I don't want to overpromise on that particular concept. The concept I mean I also I want to wait until to fully explain what the the idea is. There would be some savings with that. I it's not going to be a silver bullet to solve inflation. I mean I I do feel like I need to name that right now. fund actually for our staff. I really want to name that. Um I had intended to make a point in my opening remarks about sustainability.

Paying our staff well is an investment in our sustainability.

Allowing space in the budget to really give our staff the compensation they deserve is an investment in our district that attracts and keeps good people and keeps us robust. It's just that there are trade-offs to that that we're sort of now reckoning with. Um the idea that we have talked about is about in part um financial efficiency, but it's in even greater part it's about really maximizing the way we use our resources for better outcomes for kids.

Anna Thank you, Tom, and everyone. Um, my question is when we're thinking about these tiers, you know, I think my mind goes to, oh, well, if Tom's recommending, you know, for the technology device replacement to put that off for another two years, what if we did that in tier one and then we saved some money that way? Would you recommend not looking at it? Like that's just one example, but like yeah, just moving different pieces or just for our sake as a board.

I would what I would recommend is that you you have the right to to do that as a board. You have the right to give whatever direction feels best to you.

All I can say is that the expertise about what that really means is it isn't even so much with me. It's right out there and it has been discussed from every angle. And um I the other thing that the horse trading does is that it it ends up and I think I wasn't here last year but I think it ended up when it played out in public I think it created a sense of some some schools or people were winning and some were losing and that was not intended but that's just the way that these moments are so high stakes for people.

It can feel that way. And what I um I want to come back to a point that I just kept making earlier, but all of the we could get to six, seven, and eight in any number of ways.

These are the ways that we feel are the least do the best by kids. And and um I I definitely don't want to be cavalier to say that there's no impact. There is there is an impact for sure, but we will still have robust schools with a reduction at the the middle level.

In some ways, I think we'll actually see improvements for kids, especially at the middle school because not all improvements are about the number of positions you have. It's in large part how you use the positions.

Other questions?

Will we be hearing more about um the reduction in the middle school of French? I know that when we toured um Principal Crosby had indicated that students had a choice of language or JMG, which struck me as not great. This is probably a good time to talk about that since I did want to focus on the recommended tier right now.

Um, and I may just call Pam and Bill up. Why don't you come on down Pam and Bill? Just come to the podium.

So the just because they can speak to the specific impact of this better than I can, but the the big picture is that when we really looked at this, there were some um ways that we really wanted to improve what students got through the schedule.

One of them is social studies. The current schedule has social studies on a rotation. And how often are they getting social studies now?

They're on a rotation with STEM and science. every three days, two out of three days.

Um, and just in the world, I mean, I was a high school social studies teacher, so I definitely have a bias, but I I just feel like social studies is like an everyday subject in in middle school.

Um, and when we looked at the unified arts, the French position really fits more into, okay, bigger picture, we know we need to look at the specials. So, where can we find efficiencies with the specials?

Well, what we can do with the new schedule they're recommending is make sure that world language is not a a choice. It's a it's a must. You get it every day.

And we can accomplish that by focusing on one world language. And can you talk a little bit more about how the choices with JMG work? Now, maybe Bill can help a little bit with this just because he's used to the schedule a little bit more. But, you know, depending on the recommendations from the board, you know, certainly the schedule is something we've been thinking about um through this whole year. Um, you know, it's different for me coming to a school too where we have that rotation schedule. So, that that took a little bit for me to get used to, but we want to make sure that the kids are seeing each teacher every single day and that they're recommended that foreign language every single day. So, that's going to be taking a deeper dive into the schedule. Um, it's still a work in progress there.

I'm interested to um because I think it's only been a few years, but I believe Durham previously had the option of JMG or Spanish. It sounds like now they have the model that that FMS is looking to go to where you get both and everybody gets both. Um I'm interested to hear um how that went and if it was kind of what prompt I mean for you guys it's a scheduling issue that's why you did it. I think as a parent I appreciate that they don't have to choose and they can do both because I think both of my kids would have would have benefited from being able to take both. Um but I mean that is a shift that happened there and I don't think it was a SK was it a scheduling suggestion that or driven then or don't go far.

Yeah.

Uh so it's a little bit of both. And um last year um the it started with last year's seventh graders all taking Spanish and that was a good a positive shift. Um and um the um for this year and for next it is that all seventh and eighth graders get Spanish and they get um JMG. It gets a little complicated with all the different schedules because we actually do have to have an al alternating day schedule like a high school right now just because of the numbers and the number of teachers that cover all those classes. Um, but I would say to you that um our uh specifically in Spanish, the Spanish teacher was like a little unsure about how that was going to work um with all kiddos coming in with some different levels of background, but has now found it to be super positive and um is um we're happy for exactly what you said, Michelle. And I actually remember the the wrestling back and forth there, right? Um, so it's great to be able to have the um broader experiences that JMG provide, but also to be getting that foundation in another language. And I would say we're fortunate that that JMG has supported us with that because they've been pretty flexible with some of their um requirements to to um help facilitate it.

Good. That's that's what I was hoping you were going to say because it sounds I mean it's it's great when we can take something that's worked well in one spot and shift it over. I mean obviously it was makes a lot of sense with the with the schedule change that you guys are recommending at FMS but um I think you you can get some benefits from the schedule and you can also get some benefits from the impact on kids which I mean that's that sounds great.

Yeah, I think um I think as much clarity and and uh uh as much granularity as would be possible in terms of understanding this shift at the middle school in terms of schedule um would be extremely helpful. Um I think that um one I think just one thing if one reviewed the tape uh from last year um I think I think we spent way too long in a gray area around understanding um schedules and impacts particularly at the middle school um actually just at the middle school um so I think that uh as m as early as possible in the process it would just be really helpful to understand exactly what we're talking about. Um, if we need lots of handouts and uh and PowerPoint presentations, like that's fine. But I think like I think we just really need to understand it because um I don't think for a variety of reasons we uh we were able to get that. And again, I'm not there's no uh blame placed on that. It just it was not able to happen. Um, and I think that for us to I think in good faith um uh con consider the the the recommendations that are being made particularly for Freeport Middle. I think we would really need to understand um uh exactly what is happening and why that is beneficial and how it is beneficial. And that's certainly Bill and I's goal here and we'll be very clear um and certainly putting what's best for kids and putting together a product that is we really feel confident that's going to be a great product to present um and roll out for the kids next year. And I know uh Tommy you had already kind of given gratitude but I do I do want to give a shout out to the Freeport Middle School staff members that I sat and met with individually yesterday. They were really hard conversations. they did a really nice job listening and receiving the feedback and they were respectful conversations um and they were hard and I just want to um just give a shout out to my team on on that. So, thank you. And I think similarly um you know as um just in terms for me additional information I'd want to hear um I would I would be looking for and it doesn't have to be tonight Jen don't worry. Um you know what is one less math teacher mean? Does that mean we have less math classes offered? Does that mean the classes are slightly larger but we still have the same offerings? um you know the the impact of these changes um definitely the middle school schedule because I I think you're right Colin there was just a lot of ambiguity like it might be it's this or maybe it's that or we don't know maybe they only go on Tuesdays we don't know um so yeah and just to be clear for and for not again no no no no shade on the yeah on the folks they were they were they were trying to respond to diff really difficult questions and in a in a time in a time frame that um was untenable. So again, I just I want to just say with all respect that that was a really difficult um time, but that's what I'm wanting to avoid, right? And that made what we were trying to decide even more challenging. So um Kelly, yeah, similarly um I think it'd be really helpful since we had a really in-depth conversation last year around the ESOL program and how many instructors would be ideal for that program. I think it would be just really good to make sure we get a really thorough explanation as to why this reduction is is good for us.

And and how it plays out.

Yes. And how it plays out across the district with the students that we anticipate we're going to have next year. Yeah.

I can come up tonight because if I do, it means I get a second cookie. That's what happens.

So, um, I will share I I also just want to say, excuse me, that our Freeport High School staff has just been outstanding in this really challenging process um, in terms of wrestling with the difficulties and understanding the position that we're in in these conversations that we've had with individual people and with staff. So, similar to what Pam shared, I just wanted to share that. Um, one of the things that I shared with staff today to make sure uh I was with faculty uh after school at our meeting today was in terms of the math position because I shared all of these um positions that we are looking at uh for the proposed cuts and shared that in the 2122 school year I came to the board and requested for the addition of a math teacher. We had a full-time uh teacher added that year.

That was when our enrollment was at 595 and we knew that it was growing. It says on there that the project that the enrollment that year was 632.

That was the time when we measured it that year we at the highest we ever got to was 645.

And so now for next year as we're projected to be 554 it's 91 students fewer. And I actually just did the numbers. We go down in 2728. We go down again in 2829 and then slightly back up um to 555 in 2030 which is our incoming freshman class next year. um just to give a little insight for the math classes and this is just some you know we're proud of the the wide range of math classes that we offer.

But as we had that addition in 2021 and have now reduced the number of students that are in school um our algebra 1 classes right now the average class size is 14.8. Honors is 12.5.

Uh geometry is an average of 16.6. Honors is 19.5.

Algebra 2 is an average of 15.4 students. Honors is 15.3.

And honors pre-calculus is an example of a class that's larger. Those that class size average is 22. And so I believe that um while it will be a loss for our school and for our students, I believe that we're still able to maintain um our strong math program. We are continuing to work on our math skills and our math scores and I still think that we can do that um if we are reducing this position that these numbers will increase the average class size. Um but I think that they will still be manageable. It's also something to remember that with the wackiness of our schedule, sometimes you have a class of 11 and sometimes you have a class of 19. It's just the way that the schedule works. But I do think that those averages will stay um at a reasonable number.

Thank you. Enjoy your cookie. Your second cookie.

All right, everybody's brain full of numbers and budget for tonight's.

Um I would suggest to folks um as we are all going home and digesting a lot of information um if you think of questions that would be helpful uh ahead of time typically we ask for you know Monday afternoon. So uh Superintendent Gray has two days to try and pull together the information or delegate uh to get that information for us. Um, not to say you can't ask questions on the fly. I I know I do it all the time. Um, but if if you know it ahead of time, please share it. Um, because we can be more efficient with people's time that way. Okay.

All right. Uh, so we have no personnel issues this evening. We are back to public comments. I don't think we had a large influx of community members. Um, so then I would uh take a motion to adjurnn. Thank you, Cara and Kelly. All those in favor.

============================================================

RSU5 BOARD OF DIRECTORS MEETING TRANSCRIPT
Meeting Date: February 04, 2026
Source File: transcript_2026-02-04_V3oYVFAx_6w.txt
District: Regional School Unit 5 (Freeport, Durham, Pownal, Maine)
============================================================

What could be one of those days? Sorry.

Good evening. Welcome to the RSU5 board of directors meeting. It is Wednesday, February 4th, 2026. We are here in the Freeport High School library and we have a full complement of the board this evening with the absence of the Durham seat that's still vacant. Hopefully, we'll be getting that filled in the uh in the near term. But uh let's get started with the pledge of allegiance.

I pledge allegiance to the flag of the United States of America and to the republic for which it stands, one nation under God, indivisible, with liberty and justice for all.

We don't have any minutes from the last meeting.

That's weird. Okay, maybe we'll get them next time. Maybe we only vote on those at certain meetings. That's fine. Moving along. Uh adjustments, none. All right, so we will move on to Moon for uh student rep under good news and recognition.

Um so to start off uh last week uh students had a curriculum fair in the gym like all grades high school students um to see all the new classes that Free High School is offering for students. So some of these classes are like AP human geography, a mapping elective and like a fundamentals of music class. And then also we have four new student council members who are representing the class of 2029. And our new reps are Cooper Jamo, Alex Robinson, Lucy Erskin, and Lily Matluck. And if you don't know, student leadership are like a group um a part of the high school um that help plan events such as like homecoming and pep rallies and really like anything rel related to school culture. And then also on February 12th, we have um the option making Valentine's Day cards for the elderly.

And um the track team has a Western Main Conference championship this Friday at USM at the track um at 6. And then um this Monday from from both the middle school and high school had a walk out against ICE.

Thank you.

All right. So item seven on our agenda is public comment. So, if we have anyone who is interested in speaking, we ask that you come up to the microphone. You tell us the name, your name, and your town. And uh you have three minutes. And Erica is checking to see.

No, nobody wants to speak.

Okay. All right. There is another um public comment at the end of our agenda. Uh so there will be another opportunity.

So, we will move on to item eight, a report from the superintendent.

No long report tonight, just a few hires to inform you about. Jamie Gershuk is joining us in the central office as our instructional support administrative assistant. Colobby Best is coming on board as a laugh and learn teacher and Marin Gardner is also coming on board as a laugh and learn teacher.

Wonderful.

Um, all right. So, we have no administrator reports, no board comments or committee reports, and no policy review this evening. So, we will jump right into unfinished business, which is the fiscal year 27.

I just started saying 26. Now, we're talking about the fiscal year 27 budget uh review. And I believe uh we are starting with community programs. Peter Wagner.

Fantastic.

I'll talk very quietly. Um well, thank you for um giving community programs a shot to go first in the in the budget review cycle. This is fantastic this year. Um and hopefully this will be uh super um quick and direct for you all.

Um looking at where we've been and where we are for the coming year. Um for fiscal year 27, we're remaining flat in our request for the local share at $88,000.

Um there were no appreciable changes foreseen in our adult ed program right now. Um with our total number of English learners and high set students remaining stable and our coordinator and instructional staff hours forecast to be consistent with fiscal year 26. Um just for your information, we're at roughly give or take around 30 English learners in the program right now and we have about uh eight high set students that are that are engaged with us at this time and um uh been pretty consistent with those numbers and it's light years beyond where we were before the pandemic where we just had a handful of of each. So the program really has grown and sustained.

Um so looking uh looking back at fiscal year 26 uh we had a reduction in the local share by $24,000 which represented a little more than 21% um of the money that we received from taxpayers uh primarily to reflect the shift from a full-time adult ed coordinator to a part-time coordinator.

Um that coordinator is remaining and also remaining halftime and there were no staffing adjust adjustments for fiscal year 27. So, we're staying flat and um steady as she goes and all's looking well in the world of adulthood.

Um I'd be happy to answer any questions that you might have about that. Questions for Peter?

Really, this is unheard of. I guess my question for you, although I did promise to someone I wasn't going to ask questions tonight, we all know that was not true.

Um, so with the reduction in the current year of from full-time to part-time, you're able to meet the needs of of the position with with less Yes. So um uh so the the reduction um along with the reduction in hours for the coordinator were pretty much corresponded to one another and along with the state subsidy um which is a little hard to predict. It's very formulaic. different different categories of expenditures are are um subsidized at different rates and it's on a two-year look back. Um so it's a little hard to predict, but um but that plus the local share has been Yes. is is adequate for adult bed right now. Great.

We're really letting Peter off the hook this this easy. All right, Valerie, thank you. He's like great.

So I guess my question is broader in terms of the documents says community programs, but you keep saying just adulthood. Is that the only purview that you're covering today?

So, um, so our, uh, community programs has a super wide range of programs that we offer. We're the recck department, uh, so recreation and enrichment. We have our laugh and learn program, the preschool for three and four year olds, uh, the before and after school care for K through five, all of our summer camps, and all of those are self- sustaining, 100% self-sustaining. So um so the only money that we receive from taxpayers is allocated specifically to adult education activities and nothing else.

Um in uh in in past years I would give some updates about those other parts of the budget but um I'm not going to say that taxpayers aren't interested in that but it's not that funding is not coming from them. It's all elective um revenue based programming.

Thank you. I that's the clarification I was looking for. So thank you. Thank you, Peter.

Okay. Thank you.

All right. We will move on to school nutrition.

Hello. Can you hear me? Okay.

Okay. Um, I'm also planning to keep this a bit brief. I don't know if I'll beat Peters, but I'll try. Um, Thank you. Um, so, uh, I'll give you a current status for the nutrition department and then where we're headed for school year 27. Um, consistent with previous year's budgets, our program is in a great spot. Year to date, we have served over 185,000 meals with over 3,600 pounds or so being from local main food. um school year 26 year-to-ate stats. Um our average monthly operating expenses are at around $120,000.

Um we've spent 49% of our budget with 51% remaining. So given that it's early February, we are right on par. Our average breakfast participation in the district is at 38% and lunch is at around 67.

Um, looking ahead for school year 27, I have two small increases for our staff hours. Um, an additional hour was added for two positions, one at Freeport High School and one at Freeport Middle School. These incremental, you know, smaller increases are really just to help improve kitchen efficiencies and stay ahead of any changes that we might have um with staffing going forward.

looking at budget for school year 27. Um I know it looks scary that it's like a 50% reduction um from the general fund.

Um this it's really important to just remember that uh most of our funding comes from other sources other than the local contribution. Um, and just to give you an idea, um, about 92% of our revenue from last year came from other funding sources other than the local contributions. So, we get state and f federal reimbursements for all of our meals served. We have our allocart and our catering and we do receive interest on our school nutrition bank account as well. Um, so even with this cut, um, I have multiple equipment replacements, um, and repairs in the pipeline for this school year. A couple things at More Street School, Mass Landing is getting a new condenser and evaporator on their walk-in freezer and, um, an oven out in Poundell. Um, we're continuing to serve even more local foods than before. We've expanded our purchasing to include more farms and broaden from, you know, more suppliers. Um, today, for example, during our professional development time, we had a district-wide staff training. Um, we used the brand Maine Goodrest, um, which is a completely local man-made uh, grain company out of Scow Heaggan. and we're going to start serving um these small little they're kind of like mini pizzas and they'll be primarily breakfast options served in those. Um and with those we receive um reimbursement using the local food fund.

So we actually get 50% back for every dollar that we spend on mainade products. So um it really helps us to bring in more local foods while keeping cost down. Um, so this is all to say that even with a decrease in local contribution, our program is still moving in a positive direction, serving a larger variety of local and fresh foods, offering more taste test to students, providing meaningful professional development for staff, and keeping our kids fueled. That's all I got. Questions for Erica?

I guess I will just say that I appreciate um I appreciate the continued growth in the program and growing the the lunch and the breakfast participation. Um that 92% number is good to know. I guess I never really I never knew the percent that came from other sources. I knew the majority of it came from uh previous um from other sources other than the the local budget.

Um, so similar to Peter's, you know, most of the most of the funding for Erica's program does not come from from our local budget. So, um, I I appreciate the willingness and the ability to, um, reduce the local share that you're taking, but still be able to accommodate the increased needs, you know, while they're not huge increases, um, but to support your staffing. So, thank you for that.

I have no doubt we'll still be we'll be fine. Other questions for Kelly?

Yeah. And I just also wanted to express appreciation for your um expansion of the local foods program in our schools.

I really uh think that that we as a board value that so we we like to see that you're making those efforts. Thank you.

Other questions for Erica? You're good. Thank you. Thank you.

All right.

So, we will move on to uh superintendent proposed budgets, right? Yeah. A3.

Are you I'm Are you okay? Thank you.

Sam, what was the room number again. 238. 238. There it is.

It says 238 math lab. Is that right? No. 238 library.

Oh, okay. Look at that. It's the first one.

Okay. So, I mean, I kind of liked it that way.

How did we feel? I guess more light up there.

It's funny if that's what you're after.

Okay. So, last week I walked you through the entire budget, including an overview of all three of the tiers that the board asked for back in November. That was a tier at 6% increase, 7%, and 8%. Um, after walking you through the whole thing, I drilled down on the tier that I recommend, which is the middle tier at roughly 7%. Tonight, I'm going to go back and remind you first of what that tier included, and then talk about the other two tiers, the eight and the six, and talk about why I don't think they are as appropriate as the one I recommended last week.

So, this is basically just a review of what I just said.

Um, I want to start by reminding you again there are additions to the budget and I broke those down by necessary and recommended additions. Um, the necessary additions are all items that the board has at one point or another um either voted to approve or that we have talked about. Some of them are special education costs that are currently being paid for out of reserve but need to be transferred to the general budget because of specific student need for next year. Um and those are uh 1.0 full-time equivalent speech language pathologist five full-time equivalent teacher of the deaf out of district placements for special education.

um the uh money that has already been approved for our energy audit plan and our vehicle replacement plan and funds for a board approved sbatical leave.

Um those add up to $87,000 roughly. And then some recommended additions, most of which are actually costneutral, are funding more street summer school, which was previously in title one, adding a small stipen for a middle school swim team um in response to very strong demand from kids. Deferring some facilities maintenance of painting and carpet requests. deferring some uh I'm sorry I said def we are planning to defer some facilities maintenance but we are still hoping to add some um painting and carpet and defer some of what we think we need and keep I'm not saying this very eloquently. I'm sorry. I talked about it last week. Now I've gotten myself all tongue tied. We're there's a certain amount we would like to do. We are adding I'm recommending that we do some of that, but I'm also recommending later that we hold back on some of that.

Yeah, that was better. Um, same with technology. I'm recommending that we in the interest of not letting this completely drop off the radar, add in some money for technology, but not as much as we would really like to do. Um, I'm also recommending that we add money for a facility study, but then pay for it out of capital reserve.

And last, that we add a half-time transportation administrative assistant position, but offset that at central office by the reduction of a half-time bookkeeper, which would essentially shift the roles of staff that we currently have and be neutral to the budget.

Now, let's review the tier that I recommended last week. In my view, this is the best mo move for us right now because it positions us the most strongly to respond to needs that will come up in the future. So, it does make real reductions now. It avoids kicking the can down the road on decisions that are hard. Um, it preserves our core programming and services. And again, it will let us um think about things that we know are coming down the pike like early childhood or buildings that we may need to make serious investments in within the next handful of years.

This is again a slide that you saw last week, but this is the projected enrollment for next year.

And you have that in your packets obviously.

This is the historical student enrollment. And if you're looking at the bottom row, the trend is that enrollment has gone down. And in 2023, we had almost 2100 kids.

that has gone down to 1970 which is what we're projecting for October 1st of next year of this year.

So reviewing what I presented to you last week as the recommended tier again, what's in red is the 8% tier, which I'll talk about in more detail shortly. What's in blue is what's added to that to get us to 7%.

So I want to talk a little bit more about some of the things we discussed when we landed at recommending that tier. Again, deferring a decision now means potentially harder decisions later, and we may even be in that position now from where we were last year.

One of the key considerations we looked at was keeping our class sizes within the policy guidelines. And at tier 2, we're able to do that across the board at every grade level.

One of the really key features of this proposal is changing the schedule at Freeport Middle School to make it more efficient, but to also allow more time for what I with my social studies teacher bias considered to be very critical, and that's social studies.

It did provoke rich discussion about how to address unified arts or specials at Freeport Middle School.

And we have a recommend recommendation about how to do that which we discussed last week.

And I think the overall way I would like to characterize it is that yes, these reductions would have impact. The impact will be manageable from a a programming perspective. And in some ways at Freeport Middle School, there will be strong benefits for from reworking the schedule.

And another factor that I considered about how to bring that from tier one to tier two, if you remember that at tier 2, the reductions in staffing are nearly all edtech positions. And we currently have 5.5 open specialed edtech positions. Those are not the same kind of positions that are recommended for reduction in tier 2 because those are general edtech positions. But we have um open positions for the folks who are already in the general ed tech positions to go to if they wish.

So I feel that tier is the best balance.

And now I'd like to go back and talk about the other two tiers.

So at tier one which is what I have up there for you. Now, one of the things to bear in mind with regard to the math again is that the status quo budget was over 10%. You asked for six, seven, and 8%. So, the 8% is actually halfway down to 6%. So, that amount by itself is the biggest like in single bite. It's a big increment of reduction.

Um, some key themes here. Again, the elementary schools are where it's already the tightest in terms of staff to student ratio and class size. So, there aren't as many um reductions to be found at the elementary schools.

Class sizes at the middle and high school are where we could stay within the policy.

So, we looked at all position. We looked across the entire grade span. We looked at teaching positions. We looked at non-eing positions, support positions.

Um, we also, I know that many uh people would naturally ask this. We did look at administrative positions. We don't have any recommendations for reduction administrative positions, but we did have rich conversation about that.

And I've broken it down here by staffing reductions and non-staff reductions.

Just bearing in mind again that staffing costs are roughly are more than 80% of the overall budget. So to bring it down even to the top tier, it's really not possible to do that without looking at staffing.

So these are some of the things that are prominent in my mind about that top tier.

So some of the benefits are it's fewer reductions in staffing in programming right now which means it's just less difficult in that regard at the moment. It's less change in the short term and it also maintains the edteex for general ed which is a key component of our MTSS structure as we currently have it. MTSS being support for students who are not who need extra support in a particular subject area. They don't necessarily need special ed, but they're a little bit behind and they need extra support maybe temporarily to bring them to catch them back up.

But I think there are some cons to going that route. And the first is that it does it just defers decisions that might come back to make other decisions more difficult in the future.

It means that in the future we may risk having to do a more abrupt reduction or a larger reduction. So it's a delay rather than fundamentally addressing the structural issues that we face.

I think it just makes it more difficult over the long term. And if I figure in it's not on the slide but it's in my head. If I figure in knowing that the many of the people who would face a a loss of their job at tier 2, we have another job for them to go to. That figures prominently in my thinking.

So now I'm going to talk about tier three. And as I said last time and as I'm saying again now, this tier is not recommended.

I don't think it would be I think it would be very disruptive to reduce at this level right now. Um I'm offering this because if the board wants to come in at that level, this is the kind of thing we would need to do to get there.

So as I said before, it's much more difficult to make reductions like this at Pal because of its size. Um but you know we have to look at the big picture and we have to talk about areas across the district. So if we were to go to that level we would have to look at pal and we have some ed techs there who also serve in other roles which I discussed last week. Um and we could do something fairly uh out of the box thinking. We could move the panel fifth grade to mass landing school where the class sizes would allow them to be distributed among the fifth grades there and still be within the class size policy. I don't recommend it because it's a big transportation issue that we don't yet have the answer to and it would be disruptive to the kids to move them for just one year in that way. But it's it is something that is possible.

um we would have to reduce another position from the middle school and the option there would be to reduce the health position and try to embed health in other content areas.

Could it be done? Yes. Could it be done and do health as effectively? I do not think so.

And then at the high school, we could reduce a half a social work position with mental health needs being what they are and the amount of benefit that we gain from the work of that person. Um, I don't recommend doing that, but it is something we could do if we needed to.

So strong points why I do not recommend this tier. I just think it would be um staffing losses in really critical areas at this point. Um it would limit our flexibility to respond in key areas, special education, what if our enrollment went up? What if there was some kind of unforeseen need? I I think at Powell in particular, the RTI reductions of those ed techs would be strongly felt.

um moving mass uh pound fifth grade to mass landing possible but disruptive and difficult and we don't have all the answers yet of how that would work. And then at the middle school removing two unified arts positions would be too much change and compromise the overall student experience. And I just believe that the community would not support removing these positions. I don't think we need to do that to be on the footing where we need. So a look at class sizes.

This slide is the class sizes at tier two, the recommended level.

If we look at how that changes at tier one, it's similar because most of the changes from tier one to tier two are edtech positions and an instructional coach position.

And then going to tier three. The major change here is shifting that pow fifth grade to mass landing.

So you can see at mass landing if I go back a slide we have 18 fifth graders in Powell. It's right in the middle of the screen.

And five fifth grade classrooms at Mass Landing with 17 to 18 kids in them. We could distribute those 18 kids at Powell across five classrooms at Mass Landing.

And that would mean class sizes of 2122 at Mass Landing.

Not ideal, but within the policy guideline.

So, I'm coming to the end of the presentation for tonight, but a reminder that what is not included in my presentation are community programs and school nutrition, which you've just heard about, but also region 10. Region 10 will be presented to you later this month. Um, I don't know what their numbers are yet, but I do know that they're planning on expanding and they're planning on adding a program in HVAC plumbing down at the landing this year, which is a great offering. Um, I just don't know yet what the budgetary implications for the sending schools will be.

Um, so next week, here's what I will present on. The board had asked for a concept about longerterm sustainability.

And I will share ideas about that next week. I want to emphasize that next week the ideas that I'm going to share are conceptual but they are not finely tuned. And in fact, the point of the presentation would be to ask the board, do you want us to even run further down these rabbit holes and flesh them out with the understanding, which I'm sure you'll appreciate, that fleshing all of those fleshing those ideas out takes a lot of time. So, if they're not even ideas that sound good, we can just move on and spend our time on other things.

But if they're ideas that you'd like to hear more about, we can do that work.

Um, you had asked for at one point look ahead scenarios like what would the budget look like not next year but the year after if we do depending on what we do now and I will share that with you next week as well. Um, and I can talk about next week the local tax impact of the budget I'm recommending versus the local tax impact if we keep just the status quo budget. Um, in addition to just strictly budget considerations, we'll have an update about strategic planning and then there will be a time for extended questions and discussion from the board about the entire budget process. And before I close, I want to again just emphasize a theme I tried to draw out last week, but I it I just want to repeat it because it I just think it's really important.

every talking about reductions is really hard.

It's incumbent upon us to keep our discussion about positions not about people. But every position has a person in it and that's very difficult to separate.

What I have to think about is and what the admin team has really given lots of thought to is every position that we've talked about as a reduction has all the positions behind it that aren't written that we would be keeping. And I in particular I don't mind saying it. I he I am mindful I was a high school teacher but I am mindful that the places where the kids need the most is in the early grades. And it is prominent in my thinking to keep our class sizes for our littles manageable and our supports in place there.

Questions or discussion before I can you just remind us what the class size policy is for each grade level? I can, although I would have to I might have to rely on people who know it more intimately than I do. It's definitely smaller at the younger grades. Um, and there is within the class size policy, there's a there's a level that you're allowed to get to before you can take have to take any action. And then there's a threshold above that where it's allowed, but you have to is it come to the board? Somebody reminded me, will help me. Kate's nodding. Yeah, we'd have to come to the board for clearance. Um, so all of the class sizes that you see are before the level that the board would have to grant accordance.

Thank you. So from preK, the threshold action level is 16. But that's by law.

That's by law. Yes. For K to two, the target level is 18 and the threshold level is 20.

3 to five, the target level is 20 and the threshold is 22.

6 to 8. The target is 21 and the threshold is 24.

And oh, there we go.

And that's it. I don't see for high school.

I don't know if it's in there for high school.

No. No, it's not in there for high school, but it wouldn't be higher than the middle school.

Thanks.

I'm holding my question till you come back. If you're coming back, are you waiting there for questions?

I was trying to stop mirroring. There we go. Okay.

So, this question might be more for Kelly than you anyway, so I'll ask it while you're walking. Um, so the the discussion of tax impact next week implies we have the ED279.

Okay, I know what I'm going to be checking tomorrow. She said yes. And I whispered it, too.

Yeah. Um, so how does that change with the budget, the state budget not being completed yet? Is that in flux or potentially in flux?

Thank you for giving my moment to shine, Michelle, right? Because you know the answer to this question, but um yes, uh 8279s are actually preliminary numbers, especially in a year where the budget um has not been passed by the um it's a proposed governor's budget. um that still needs to be passed by the legislature. So um and I just want to say that um it we are receiving additional funding um with the current proposed budget the way it's looking. What we really haven't gotten time to do um as a as a team is to kind of look at um what the proposals look like and and how to push those through.

I mean, I've looked at them individually, but I haven't had time to sit down with cabinet or um any members of the administrative team to kind of look in look at what that fleshes out to. Um, and part of the troublesome process for us is because we do this so early as a board, um, and you're and you're typically setting the warrant articles, um, in March is there's very little time for anything to really happen with the governor's budget, right, between now and then. Um, it will still be in flux. So if there is any sort of curtailment um then we would have to deal with that um say say if it happens in late May or June um and we're already through our process a curtailment ultimately which means we wouldn't get as much money as we were expecting we can't tax more right because we're the assessments are set when when the when the um budget gets passed the very next meeting you guys send the assessment warrants out for taxes. Um, and as part of the warrant process, when you're kind of walking through that, you are establishing the amount that we can assess taxes for based upon expenditures that we're approving at the budget meeting and then um any anticipated revenues. So, if any of those revenue factors change, you just have to be responsive within the year. So, for example, we haven't had one years and we're going to knock on some wood. There hasn't been a curtailment since I started around in 2010 here at five. Um I think it was 2011 that year we dealt with a curtailment and we were looking for a couple hundred,000.

Um and basically we ended up freezing council and capital projects. We froze book money. We froze supply money. Uh those types of things. So that's something that we would have to consider. Um, and again, if we get too far along in the process, all the contracts have been issued. Um, there's not a whole lot of atwill employees within the district. The majority of our staff are under collective bargaining agreements. Um, and so, um, it's typically not going to hit the areas of salaries and benefits um, if there's a contailment other than we may choose to not fill open positions in the meantime. Correct.

Thank you.

But if that is that is that a a case where we would use undesated fund balance to sort of fill some of the gaps or how does that work?

So we don't have authority to use undesated fund balance except for during the budget process. So, one of the other potential benefits of having the article reserves that we've established over these past two budget cycles would be you could potentially tap into those um for those resources. Um so, that will also be coming to you as a discussion at a later meeting about whether or not we're going to um increase those reserves. What does that look like?

Where are they at currently? um that will be at a future meeting as well to talk about so we can deliberate that.

And if there was a catastrophic drop in funding that we couldn't work our way around, we could hold another annual budget meeting sometime in the year to get authority to access more of the undesated fund balance, but it would require you you do the entire process. Yeah.

That you do now. It's just a special meeting. Yep. Thank you.

And this is why we have also some of that buffer of like we're saying 7% but it's slightly lower. Is this to help um us with that potential gap as well?

Yeah. And I think also the numbers that we don't have a firm a firm grasp on, right? Like region 10, those types of things. But but once March comes and you actually vote, that sets the cap of expenditures, right? We can't go above that. Right.

Right. Um, one of my other questions that jumped out uh was you mentioned there might be actual benefits from the the shift um in how we're looking at the middle school with the with the um schedule.

Schedule. I'm looking at just Yes. So, the unified arts and how the the uh adjusted schedule might work. Um I think that was one of the items the board had mentioned last week that we would love to hear a little bit more about if if and when you guys were ready to do that. And Pam's coming up so I think maybe she's ready. Right.

Pam and Bill have worked really hard on this and so they have they do have something to show you. I got kind of I don't want to say a long thing to share, but um Bill and I spent a lot of time and a lot of consideration into this and I just have a slideshow I want to show you guys. It's going to be a little bit to digest. I'm going to slowly walk us through this um and certainly give an opportunity for any questions. But first of all, I just want to thank you for the opportunity tonight for us to share this with respect to the budget. We want the board to understand the scheduling concept for FMS and how we are confident in offering a strong product despite the proposed budget cuts. Is this just Apple uh screen sharing?

All right. Library. All right. I just went to room 212. Okay. Got it. Yep.

23824. I have that right.

Sam might need your help there.

So, like I said, a lot to digest. I'm going to kind of walk us through this slowly. A lot of thought um has been put into this. Um just want to give Mr.

Ridge a big thank you, too. Um he and I have spent a lot of time on this.

Well, this is the most challenging part. I'm doing pretty good.

Sam gave me a faulty laptop. It's his fault.

And again, thank you for giving me the opportunity tonight. I know it wasn't really built into the agenda, but I just, you know, you guys had asked last week, so I wanted an opportunity to shed some light with some visuals here.

got a whiteboard. We could just draw it.

We I mean I know Mr. Gray is really good with the markers on the whiteboard, right?

Can you send the Tom's still has it on his laptop, too. So, maybe we can because I definitely want to show you guys the visuals as we talk through this.

Sorry everybody. All right, we're doing better here.

All right.

All right, so the Freeport Middle School schedule concept. So follow follow with me.

So, I'm going to give you an overview. I'm going to walk you through the sixth, seventh, and eighth grade structures along with some key comparisons.

So, per the last meeting, um, we talked about some budget cuts. So, trying to figure out how to creatively create the forest product for our kiddos here at Freeport Middle School. So, the sixth grade structure, as referenced above, would be daily core classes with 50-minute periods and optimized class sizes for foundational learning.

Seventh grade would be continued daily core instruction in smaller math classes to support skill development and growth.

Eighth grade, and that'll get a little tricky, but I'll talk you through it, will have a rotation still, but an innovative rotation system with extended class periods and language opportunities for high school readiness. So, key comparisons will give you a visual analysis of class sizes, instructional time, and scheduling benefits across all grade levels.

So, sixth grade schedule, 50 minute daily periods. All core subjects meet every day for 50 minutes, ensuring consistent instructional time. Math class sizes will be between 18 and 20.

Smaller math classes allow for individual instruction and skill development. Core class sizes 22 to 23.

ELA social studies, STEM, science classes maintain optim optimal learning environment. The unified arts rotation will be JMG, health, PE, art, digital media, and music. So, class sizes are below the threshold action level that Tom was talking about earlier set by policy. Students will have access to rotate through the listed unified arts.

Math class sizes will be slightly smaller due to the accelerated math class. So, they'll see every class every day. That's including that social studies piece.

Let's go on to seventh grade.

So again, 50 minute daily periods. Uh maintains consistent daily schedule structure for all core academic subjects. Math classes, math class sizes 17 to 18. Reduce math class sizes provide enhanced support during a critical learning year. I mean every year is a critical learning year. Core classes 19 to 21. Smaller class sizes across all subjects compared to grade six. Again, we have the unified arts um options below, ranging from JMG, health, PE, art, and digital media. Remember, two students have access to band and chorus as well.

All right, bear with me here. I'm going to explain this really well. Eighth grade um rotational. So, eighth grade currently does this and has historically followed this rotating schedule model.

Our sixth and seventh graders are living it this year. And as it may seem a little bit confusing, these kids knock it out of the park. Um, it out of full transparency, when I first onboarded, it was a different model for me, but the kids really do a great job with it. It's communicated really well by staff.

There's visuals in classrooms. There's visuals on the flat screen boards. Um, the kids just they really do a great job with it.

So, what we'd be looking at, and I know this might sound a little confusing at first, is a rotation breakdown. So if you look at rotation one and rotation two, that means either the morning chunk or the afternoon chunk. And we still got to figure out how those rotations will fall into place. But what will what it will look like is math for 60 minutes, ELA for 60 minutes, social studies for 60 minutes on that first rotation. Each class will meet two out of the three days a week, keeping class sizes at 17 to 18 kiddos. The second rotation would be the other half of their day. They'd have STEM, science, and Spanish for 60 minutes. So, Spanish becomes a core class. Again, these classes would meet two to three times um two to three two out of the three days a week. Class sizes 17 to 18 students. Unified arts include the JMG health per digital media. So, math, while this is a shift, we have had teacher input. We spent a lot of time getting some teacher input.

will continue to align with surrounding schools in terms of instructional time. In addition to instructional class time, we have the the ability to offer um intentional math supports through our BCS model if kids require more support and review.

We're looking at ELA and social studies.

So, in the eighth grade model, we view these curriculums as aligned.

These teachers work really closely to structure classes in a way to support each other's curriculum. Uh some schools will refer to this as a humanities type model. With that said, students will have access to social studies in ELA, one to two classes uh periods each day.

So, it's a really really good experience for that.

Here's a chart um kind of talking about how we're um the class threshold. So, you can see that red bar up top. So, class sizes still fall below the threshold set forth by policy. The eighth grade rotation class sizes across all subjects promote personalized learning and project-based learning styles. So some of you very very familiar with Freeport Middle School. We got the National History Day, the Dirty 30s. The kids do the science board games, the STEM clocks, robotics, independent end of the year options.

This will give us some opportunities to even be more creative um with some other ideas with that.

So, if we're looking at instructional time comparison, and I've got it graphed out here, right, eighth grade, seventh grade, and sixth grade. So, sixth and seventh grade daily model provides consistent daily instruction with the 15-inute periods, seeing every core class every day. The eighth grade rotation model offers an extended 60 minutes, allowing for deeper exploration, project based learning, and activities while meeting two of every three days. extended class periods and rationale schedule and the eighth grade support high school readiness skills and learning. So the eighth grade schedule kind of gives them a little bit more of a transition I think to what they do like at the high school. So you can kind of look here the two shades indicate the differences between how rotations fall in the eighth grade schedule meeting the minutes the kids need in each core class per week.

So if we look at another diagram with the eighth grade rotation.

So if you look at the two rotation models, classes will be divided into a rotation one and two for a balanced curriculum every day. The 60-minute periods extended class time allows for deeper exploration and hands-on activity. And for what I've learned from this eighth grade team, they knock it out of the park with these super duper creative ideas. Meeting two out of three days, each class meets two out of three days, providing time for processing.

That includes Spanish being one of those four classes. and the class sizes meet the target sizes.

Key benefits of the schedule structure. So we have class sizes. Class sizes for sixth to 8th grade remain within the limit set forth by policy and more often align to the target class size set forth by policy. Eighth grade flexibility rotation schedule with extended periods allows for that deeper learning and project based activities. high school language readiness. Spanish language introduces into the eighth grade rotation and prepares students for the high school language requirements. So, they would see social uh Spanish as a core class.

And then finally, our schedule comparison summary. So, breaking it down by grade levels, comprehensive overview comparing the scheduling framework across grades six through 8th, highlighting key differences in structure, timing, and class configurations. So, we've got the class duration, sixth and seventh grade, 50 minutes, 8th grade, 60. Meeting frequency, daily and daily for sixth and seventh graders, two out of three days for the eighth graders, which they already do. We look at the class sizes, those fall right into uh policy. Um, really fair. of the core classes. Sixth grade's a little bit high, but we're still not hitting that threshold.

Spanish, um, the kids will have that more. They won't suffer from any summer gap from any thing they learned through seventh grade, meeting as more of a unified arts. Eighth grade can just kick off and not have to worry about rebuilding those skills from the seventh grade and really can start building to get that robust foreign language experience for them to get them ready for high school Spanish.

That was a lot. Um we have put a lot of thought a lot of thought into um what we have to work with. We put a lot of thought into the amazing staff we have, the skill set the staff has, the creativity the staff has and what's really good for kids and we've taken all that and we feel we have a really strong product to support the learning of our sixth, seventh and eighth graders to prepare them um for for the high school.

I just wanted to present to you tonight to let you know that we're taking the cuts seriously and not just the cuts, taking our job as building administrators, educators, and everybody on the team uh who works hard to deliver the best education um and experience for our kiddos. Um and I just stand here today um to appreciate the confidence because I am so confident that we are going to rock this school this year and next year. I'm just feeling really, really good about it.

And that's what we have here tonight. So, thank you.

Thank you, Pam.

I love that you had like different visuals like to see it in different ways because that was that was great. And to get pull that together since last week is pretty impressive. So, thank you. I know that's a lot of work to pretty passionate about, but put all those puzzle pieces um in a way that works. Again, thank you for the time tonight.

Questions? Um yeah, sorry Pam. I think I have a question for you.

Just give back Bill's laptop and come back.

So, thank you so much you and Bill and everyone who's been working on that.

That's really really helpful to see the visual of how that would look and and hear the the um the plan around that. That's really helpful. I am a little I'm still wanting to hear more I guess about the language change and currently sixth graders I believe are exposed to a language in a world cultures class.

Right. And would that world cultures class be absorbed within that social studies class that would be happening?

It would really be absorbed with that digital citizen course that we're going to be implementing in. Um, which won't even just be just digital citizenship.

It'll be better research skills, communication skills. Um, still looking at a creative way to figure out how to bring that to sixth grade just looking at the cards we have. But we certainly feel it's also important to bring that digital component and citizenship to kids especially in the the world we're living in now with the AI component and the cell phones etc etc. So that would be an absorption. Yes.

Okay. And currently seventh graders get to choose between JMG, Spanish and French. Correct. That's correct.

And so with this plan seventh graders would not have a language.

Seventh graders wouldn't have a language and we really thought hard about that.

So right there's a common misconception um that sometimes more years equals more learning. Um when we look at this the way they're getting whatever foreign language they're choosing now it's a UI UA option right um and then so you're just getting I want to say a minimal amount but less amount of that core instruction with the foreign language in that summer gap. So the way we're looking at it, while we're putting Spanish as more of a core class, they'd be aligned with an eighth grade team. It wouldn't be a UA option, can really start setting those skills and really taking off with that with the kids. So we're hopeful that that model will be more beneficial. It actually calculates more minutes of Spanish instruction that way.

Um, can you say more about how Spanish was the chosen language and is that an enrollmentbased decision or can you can you say I mean really hard decisions, right? All of them are really really hard decisions. Um, and certainly you're looking at the high school too, right?

The theater program. Um, and I know that um, in hearing from different administrators too, sometimes we're filtering kids in and they have that different skill set. Um, which can be a benefit and certainly can be a challenge if you're a teacher trying to get kids here to here. It's hard, right? You don't want to have to pick one or the or the other. And I could maybe have a better prepared answer, but I think when we're looking at it, it's going to prepare the kids for a more equitable experience. Um, and I don't want to use DCS, but DCS has that Spanish experience, too, and it kind of filters that in. The kids still have that foreign language option when they get to the high school.

Pam, am I correct that there were there are more kids right now choosing Spanish than French, too?

So, I guess I I'm wondering if if DCS and FMS students are all coming into the high school with Spanish experience, would would that impact the Spanish uh language teaching needs? Is that making sense? And then kids who want to learn French, would they they would all be coming in needing a different probably like an intro to French. And I I guess I'd have Mrs. Ggo maybe talk more about their programs, but that would be my strong assumption.

And I would imagine the kids coming in that would make the program even a little bit robust because they're going to have a setup on those skill sets that are already kind of commonly foundationally set um from filtering into the high school.

It's a tricky one, right Cara? It's like, you know, you don't want to cut any programs and, you know, I'm coming into this school and they've just got an awesome opportunity with all these different options and opportunities and no one wants to sit here and have to choose what programs are being cut and unfortunately you're tasked with doing that and looking at data and what's least impactful and then it's like you making the right decision. Are you second guessing, but you do the best you can to make that best decision.

Um, I'm this isn't necessarily a budget issue, but I'm just thinking for those eighth graders who maybe in the past have gone on a sort of a capstone trip to Montreal or I'm sorry, to Quebec City, I'm assuming without a French program that might not be something that the eighth graders are able to do anymore. So, I'm just thinking if we go to Spanish exclusively, it would be really nice if we consider something similar. I agree. I agree. I agree.

And I'll just throw in because from an equity perspective, the Durham kids don't have any access to those types of programs. So, if there was one for a replacement for the Quebec City one or it's Quebec City, right? Yeah. You know, that maybe they go together. You know, I'm always always open to fresh ideas and exploring new things. That's what we do, right? Um and I'm always open to that. I'm always open to trying to figure out how to provide opportunities for kids, no matter how big they are, small opportunities, medium opportunities, or we're thinking way outside the box. Malik, um I would not a question for you, Pam.

Um but Tom, I would love to hear um maybe next week when you talk more about kind of the long-term plan um the strategic thinking that's gone behind this the language decision and how it um will then affect the kind of the high school course of studies. Um the I mean the the French the French language um reduction at the middle school is the one that I'm having the hardest time kind of wrapping my head around right now. I would just love some more information about that. Sure. Don't need it right now.

Yeah. I I think that that is something that we have to we have to flesh out um because it would certainly impact the numbers going forward to the high school. There's there's time to think about that and not that I necessarily want to take too much time to editorialize and I I hope that when I say this it will have some credibility with people. I I'm personally actually very passionate about language. I had the opportunity to take German from fifth grade and at this point I'm fluent in German and I would love I would love for us to be a district that had world language going down to kindergarten. Um I just don't see that as possible right now and um I think that's a great topic to talk about in a strategic plan as an aspirational um you know something we could aspire to. Um, the short answers about why we would propose this are the schedule at the middle school really does need streamlining and Pam and Bill have done a great job thinking about how to make that happen. It really makes the social studies teacher in me happy. I don't think what they're getting right now in social studies is nearly enough. Um, and everything is a really difficult tradeoff. Um, this is a painful one to consider.

Yeah, it' be interesting to see, you know, numbers for enrollment between the different languages at the high school.

Um, be interesting. I don't know if they can track this, but to see like how many kids come from Durham that then choose to move to French, right? Because they never had French in middle school. Maybe they choose to do it in high school, maybe they don't. I don't know. Um, I appreciate hearing that it's actually more minutes of Spanish um, educa, you know, instructional time than splitting it over the two years. Um, because one of my questions was going to be is I know um, my I I know coming out of Durham and I imagine it's probably similar coming out of uh, of FMS. um you know, kids who have have, you know, taken to the language can move into, you know, Spanish 2 as a freshman and get all the way up through Spanish 5 as a senior if that if that's their desire.

Um, and so I guess my question would be, you know, with only 8th grade, does that still cover all of the the the Spanish one curriculum so that if kids so chose and maybe had a recommendation from the the teacher could move on to to Spanish 2 as a freshman. Um, so that was one of my questions. Definitely a wonder other while we have Pam up here. Yeah, thank you. Um the visuals were very helpful and appreciate you putting that together in such a short amount of time.

Um a few questions. Um, one is you mentioned in seventh grade there's no music that's offered, but they do have chorus and band.

Yeah. So, that's similar to the model we have this year as well. So, they definitely have access to that band chorus grouping um and are pulled out for individual lessons with band and chorus as well. So, similar to what we have this year and that's during the school day. Yes.

Okay. Got it. Um, and then could you not related to this schedule, but in terms of the ed tax, looking at the tier 2 reductions, could you walk us through just a little bit about um how many edte you currently have and the different categories of them?

Sure. So, I can focus on we're talking about the uh tier 2 with the two general edit texts. So, we have three. We kind of align them by grade level, sixth, seventh, and eighth grade. Uh they work really closely. They attend all the team meetings. They work very closely with supporting kids. They pull kids out for structured support, which is really helpful. A lot of times during our BCS time, but work really closely with the teams. Um we meet twice a week with each grade level. That includes administration, school counselor, social workers, um ed techs, and we identify some kids that And it may just be a motivation thing. It may be an obstacle that's really getting in their way to get those academics done. And those those staff members who again a huge shout out do an excellent job not just helping the kids academically make some really solid connections with them and kids that even struggle maybe attendance-wise coming to school. That's their person, right? So they do a really great job with those connections.

And so the two reductions that we're talking about at tier two, that would be from two grade level general ed texts.

Got it. And currently how many are there? Three.

Thank you. And um last question is it looks like the largest class size is actually a grade six. if you're looking by it's still below the threshold but just under um could you talk about if you have do you have any concerns about that? So enrollments up in grade six. Um you know there's always concerns when class sizes get larger. Um you know not speaking to prior experiences but I've come from school districts where unfortunately class sizes can be 2728 which is like mindblowing right. Um I've had experience as a classroom teacher where I have had class sizes in a science classroom 2728. Right? it's like so hard to wrap your head around that. So, I look at this um and it's really ideal to keep those class sizes minimal. I look at the team of teachers that we have in grade six and you know definitely be some further conversations with them and you know where do you see there being some obstacles? How do you see us supporting you because this is a little bit new for the staff with having those class sizes bump up a little bit. Do I have concerns? I don't have concerns. I have faith and I have faith that we'll figure that out. Um, but we certainly want to keep an eye on some of those class sizes that are a little larger than normal and support the teachers, support the curriculum, support the materials, and support the connections that the kids will generally have with the teachers.

Thank you. Thank you.

Other questions for Pam or for others? I think I have a question. It's probably more for Tom because it's kind of about that group of edteexs as a whole because we call some of them general ed edte. We call some of them RTI edte. We call some of them bench sub edex. And I think I understand the bench sub. Thank you, Ray Groen. Uh what's up?

Yes. Um, it's it is kind of funny because I feel like the the the bench sub name came from Ray and Ray's no longer here. Will had his own name for him, but I can't remember it now. But oh, it was the floating. Okay. Yeah. So, um, maybe once you leave, we'll take your name.

Although, we're getting rid of it, so maybe not. Um, so I guess I'm I'm interested in knowing are those are those essentially the same positions in different schools or are they doing different things depending on the school they're in? So in general there are two categories.

There's special ed and general ed. RTI is general ed. And so they are and for for new board members RTI response to intervention.

It's basically extra help for kids who are behind. So they may not have a disability, which is what special ed would be, but you know, if I think about likely scenarios, these may be elementary school kids who have not been exposed to language in the same degree as home as other kids, and they don't have a disability. They just need to be read to. So they they need extra support in that area. Um they they provide small a lot of small group instruction and individual instruction and support pull out And it and that's so whether we call it an RTI edtech or a general ed edtech or well the bench sub is a bench sub right they're filling in when people aren't there but um an RTI edtech and a general ed edtech are essentially the same.

An RTI edtech is a version of a general ed edtech. Okay, maybe general ed is anything outside of special ed and a special ed edtech is going to be in a more specialized role in one of our special education programs like life skills for example. So they'll be directly serving kids with IEPs and it's it's a just a different beast.

Okay. Um and then the RTIB that is also a general ed edtech. Yes, correct. And we are not in tier 2 recommending any reductions in that programming. Well, that was at Panel on RTIB, right? No, but I I don't believe Panel is the only school that has RTIB edex. Correct. Um, I don't think so. Yes, also has Yeah, because I feel like that's something that's been added in the last, you know, as we were seeing more behavioral issues, but not necessarily special ed behavioral issues, the support of the or the RTIB ed techs. Um, so I was just clarifying that none of the recommended reductions are in those positions, assuming we don't go all the way to the 6% tier three. Correct.

Correct. No, not true. No, there there's a proposal in tier two that the RTIB ed more street.

Okay. It just says RTI ed tech. So those are RTI. Yeah. Sorry. So behavioral versus academic.

Okay. So those are both B's. That was my question. Thank you.

Those are B. Thanks Pam. Thank you everybody.

But just to be clear, these positions are not filled right now. Is that correct? No, they are.

Oh, they are. So the the RTI the general ed ed tech positions that are in the recommended tier to be reduced are filled right now but we have 5.5 special ed vacant edtech positions and I feel like the appropriate question is how do we meet the needs of the stuff that's being done by this group without them.

That's for you, Tom, or anyone else who wants to jump up and help. But well, it it would certainly be an impact that would be felt.

Um, we'd have to do more RTI within the classroom. Most of RTI is supposed to be done in tier one, which is right in the classroom with differentiated instruction, and that extra person does help. Um, so I I certainly wouldn't pretend it wouldn't be an impact. it would be a manageable impact and given the other choices of where we would reduce to achieve that level I think that's the most appropriate place.

The last thing I would want to do is be cavalier about um saying that any of those reductions wouldn't have an impact.

Oh yeah. I mean, I think I think we can all all agree that we don't have any positions that don't add value. And I appreciated you starting the presentation last week, you know, putting that front and center. Every single position has value. Um, and every position will be felt. It's, you know, what's manageable, what how do we continue to provide the best services we can with the resources we have. So, um, yeah. Chris, um, something I would like to see for next week is kind of a thought on a I don't know exactly how to word this, but like kind of kind of a blend between a seven and 8% tier because there's a lot I see in this 7% tier that I very much question. And I know again every position has value. Um, an example of this is that I see us cutting two from two of these general edexs from mass landing or not mass landing, um, Freeport Middle when there are three total, which is twothirds of the edex that we have there. Um, and so I'm I'm I'm curious if there's kind of a a balanced proposal in in that with those two tiers, or maybe what might be helpful is what do we have now? What are we proposing for next year? Right? So, what I don't know is, you know, is there only one and we're cutting one? Is there three and we're cutting one or we're cutting two? It it might be helpful to know, you know, kind of what what do we have now versus what's the proposed?

Yeah, you had mentioned that like one of the things we don't see on this list is the is what we are keeping.

It it might be good to know what we are keeping um to understand that you know the cuts have this proportion of impact versus this proportion.

Absolutely.

So you're asking to see something of between tier one and tier two. How would we get something between tier one and tier two?

Yep.

Yeah. I think it'd be helpful for me with some of these positions, particularly the behavioral edte, to hear directly from the administrators about the actual impacts that they perceive would be from eliminating these positions because I know we can talk in generalities here, but it would just be helpful for me to know, you know, exactly how they see think this is going to impact our kids in the classroom.

Can I add to that and and a plan for um medi um mediating that mitigating mitigating thank you that's not the right yeah what's the impact and how are they going to deliver with in the absence of that person or people I haven't really heard anything much about the instructional strategist so just making sure that's included. Sure.

for the instructional strategist.

Correct me if I'm wrong. This is one of two, correct? That we have at three. It's actually one at three. One of three. Okay.

And at at the elementary level and the the plan is to go from three to two.

See, that would show up in the what are we keeping pile? Yeah.

Yep.

This is maybe a strange thing to ask for, but if there was any way we could hear about um uh impacts that we will see um reflected in uh test scores that are brought before us sometimes later in the evening in which we're talking about this. Um and then ones that are not really testable or or or are not tested or are not um maybe let me put it this way are not shown to the board um are not something where the board can say oh we really see what that impact is. Um not to say that again the like how kids work in groups.

Yeah. I mean, it's not to say that I'm I'm in no way prioritizing the the um the testing scores as an educational measure, but just like we do see those and so we can talk about them, but if we don't have any, we don't see other measures um and how they sort of like operate yeartoear, we kind of don't really have a sense of that. So I think that um because I found myself as I was going through this just at a sort of like one logical way to look at this is like if our scores if our test scores are not where we want them probably reducing our teaching staff is not a great way to get them higher. Um again that's oversimplified but it's like one way of looking at it but um uh maybe that's just again maybe like we're not we wouldn't see that we wouldn't see it play out in that way.

Um, so I don't know. I I think that might be helpful to have some sort of sense of that. Um, and yeah, I think I would just I would also say that the um I would I think the on the one hand the mitigation question is the much harder question. Um, but unfortunately that is that is the question. Um it's not like like your initial question Kelly of like what's the impact going to be is like important but it's like the mitigation and like can it be mitigated or can it not be and is the mitigation satisfactory um for uh the administrators and then we eventually get to determine whether or not that mitigation is satisfactory in terms of our responsibility by law to be serving the children.

Okay.

Yeah. And I just want to mention that the question about how we measure all of this is really important and one that the strategic planning committee is taking seriously this year with the strategic plan is how are we measuring everything? How are we measuring the goals that we have? Um so I appreciate this being brought up again and um we'll we still have a few months to develop that plan. Um, but I think that this process will help that process too.

um on the ESOL position. I know that we have a few board members who are definitely attached to that for good reason, but uh could you give us a sense of like the the number of students that are in that program over I know the last couple of years um I know you said it's dropped um but again seeing numbers as well as the number and we can't predict the future but kind of as we project out um to get a sense of why Erica actually has some numbers. Okay.

Yes. Yep. We could look at that really quickly.

You want the overyear numbers as well as Sorry, Erica Matio, assistant superintendent. You would like the overyear numbers as well as the current or projected? Okay. Um, let me start.

So, I don't have the trend numbers up, but I can grab them in just a minute. I can start with our current um population that we serve. Um, I don't have a presentation for you.

Okay. Um so uh we are currently serving 44 students um 13 of whom are at the prek2 span uh 12 of whom are at grades three, four and five. Uh at the middle school level it's five students. Uh we have 10 students in grades 9 through 11 and four in the cohort that are meant to graduate in June. So if we don't gain any new students, we can anticipate retaining about 40. Um if we do, um we're s you know, this is the level at which we are currently serving. Um and then inside of those counts, um they have different levels of need as determined by their annual assessments.

Um and so those range between one and two service hours um instructional service hours which is not necessarily measured in a 60minute increment but rather standardized um comparison to their regular general education schedule and um we have uh 14 students in the twohour range and 30 students in the one hour range. Is that per day? Uhhuh. Yeah.

Instructional hours and they can be served in groups and um primarily our students exist in the Freeport schools.

So MSS, MLS, FMS, and FHS.

Um I'll look up the trends.

One of the things that I think we learned about last year, and I don't know if the these numbers pick those up, was there's uh a a group of kids that are like, I'm sorry if I'm using the wrong term, monitor, or is that in this number as well or is that separate from this?

It is separate because that is not a required service area. Um and so we are currently monitoring 16 students.

Okay. So they don't have any I no one to two hours a day, no required service structures.

Typically the guidance is that those students are served through what we're referring to as RTI, academic services, um or MTSS, which is the essentially the same thing. Yeah. Okay. Thank you.

Yeah. Okay. So historical numbers um and this was in the spring, sorry, in the September presentation.

Uh but I'm going to pull up um so the service uh count in 2425 this was overyear total so there could have been some coming and going was 46.

Um in 232 24 it's 116. Um in 2223 it was 101.

Um and across all of those years and including this year there were 3.0 I know FTE serving for reference Chris um in the kind of projections on that is there I mean do we have a sense if the the CDS transition is going to increase those numbers um is that something we we we can get a sense of I don't know the answer um I would be I would be very surprised if it increased it back to 100 plus where we were before.

Yeah. Interestingly, the um what we what is referred to as the I don't know why the screen is flashing, but it's not me.

Um the home language screener, which is what we use to do the initial identification, um is uh administered by us. And I don't know that CDS has an equivalent to that. um because they're not providing educational services. So um I don't know how they would record that. Um certainly we do it on our screening and our um onboarding through the enrollment process.

And um I don't know how Erica's numbers have that she has her finger on back to 2017. I was going to say because there were there was a point in time where we had a 0.5 ESOL teacher for the whole district 2021.

And how many students was that? 14. Okay.

Um and we had we did have some edtech supporting um in those really high volume years. Um I I don't know what exactly their schedules look like. Um but I do have a note of that. I not my lived experience. So, somebody else would have to probably uh clarify that, but we had 2.0 FTE in 2122 with a total count of 24. It's the most recent time we have two.

And I do think in the sort of the the peak year of 23 and 24, um I think we had three full-time and then we had a contract. So we were almost up to four people covering that retired December and and I don't Yeah. No. So I don't have enough context about that.

Yes. I think we've been as low as a halftime position for the district and as high as essentially four full-time.

I think there was some um mobilizing to register students at their place of residence and that was also part of the need.

Yeah. that that was the year that a week before school started, we got a call that I think we had 40 kids that were that needed to be registered or something like that. So, did that answer your question, Chris, on that? Yes. Thank you.

Y um I think two questions. One might be able to be answered now and the other probably would be next week. Um, but has D uh DCS ever had a French offering?

Not since I can recall, but we got 23 years of experience. So, we've not had French.

No. No. Okay. The answer is not had French.

Okay. Um, my other question was I know that there's a collection of schools that we like to kind of like um keep up with um for lack of a better word. Um uh I would be curious to know among those schools um what sorts uh what sort of offerings are do they have at the middle school level in terms of languages and and I suppose well I mean yes I guess it'd be nice to know and be shamed uh if we don't if everybody else offers uh Latin in kindergarten um that would be helpful to know. Uh but I'm primarily uh interested in the the district that I just came from. My previous position had is RSU40700 kids across seven schools. Uh much lower tax base they had Spanish to in kind going down to kindergarten in every school.

So I am shamed. Okay, great. Thank you Tom. I needed I needed more shame to carry around. Thank you. They had 30 kids in kindergarten though.

So they didn't try to make it feel better.

Can I add on to that the middle school language but also high school language? Sure. As well.

All right. Any other things they Oh, Valerie, sorry. I looked right. I was waiting patiently. Um, while we're talking language, do we have enrollment numbers for Latin or of the three languages? I noticed I know I thought I remembered that we have have two Latin teachers and that's why we thought maybe reducing to one might be less painful. Do we have enrollment numbers for their languages in the high school?

I don't have them at my fingertips. I don't know if Jen has them at her fingertips.

And as a former world language teacher, I'm sure it's difficult for Jen to even think about reducing a a world language position. So, we we'll start with that.

We know this is hard.

Yes. Thank you. Um Jen Gok from the high school. So, um I think the thing that we have to consider is what's the balance of the class sizes across the three languages because right now um our students almost always get their first choice of a language. Both of the other districts that I came from always had students pick a second choice for a language and did not guarantee their first choice. Now, at some point, if they didn't get their first choice and later on in high school said, "Okay, I've taken two years of Spanish. I'd like to switch over to French." They were able to do that. You didn't have to be in nth grade to get into an intro level of a language. Actually, we offer an award here at Academic Awards for students who take on multiple languages.

So, there will be an impact of the number of ninth graders who can get the language of their first choice. that is a definite that will happen. Um what we see right now is that when we get up into because currently we offer Latin four, we offer Spanish four and five and we offer French four and five. Currently our numbers for French four and five are very uh very low and so they are combined into one class. Last year that was the case for Spanish four and five.

we've increased Spanish by a little bit and so um we have a large enough class for Spanish four to be a class by itself whereas Spanish 5 is very small and so I do think that we are going to see a benefit of those numbers growing in terms of the upper levels of French and Spanish. um what the impact would be of not offering French at the middle school level is that we would not offer um French five in person. And right now the numbers I can say um in the last four or five years they have been under 10 students every year in French five. Um, right now the the number is um, if I pull that up right now, sorry for one sec. Um, the number of students in French 5 is four students. And so we'd love to see that be 20 students. 20 in that class, 20 in in um, Spanish 4. And um we would also have the opportunity which we have right now is that students who have um had a strong foundation in Spanish in the middle school will be able to start here in Spanish too which they could do right now. And so then they would go level two, three, four or five. So while we are reducing the number of sections that we're offering for Latin, the hope is that we will still have a robust uh number of program and number of students who are able to take Latin with our one Latin teacher and also potentially see those numbers grow at the upper upper levels for French and for Spanish at the same time.

Um, in terms of the number of students who are taking Latin, I will say that Latin is um they they have done our Latin teachers have done um a phenomenal job of um growing that program and having students um a a large number of students in that program. Uh and so um but we feel that we would be able to balance that some students might not get um to take Latin in their freshman year um but they they might then be able to join we would pri prioritize them getting it in their sophomore year so that they would be able to do that. So right now for example um we would need to configure who teaches um what well with one teacher which se how many sections they would need of Latin one versus two versus three versus four. We currently don't offer Latin five. So um that would be the case next year. Um and so right now we have a section of Latin one that has 13 students. We have a section of Latin one that has eight students. Uh and then we have um uh a section of Latin one with 16 students and uh another with 11 and another with 13. And so those are small class sizes um you know as as we compare and we're talking about other grade levels. And so some of those classes would be combined to be in one section and then some of those students may not get their first choice and may be um in a place where they're choosing French or or Spanish as their language.

Thank you. All right.

Have we exhausted our questions for this evening knowing all rights are reserved to continue asking questions next week?

Okay. Thank you.

All right. So we will move on to unfinished business uh 12B which is the um which is the early childhood special education. Uh so we will get a motion on the floor and then we will have Tom provide us an update. So, do I have a motion for consideration and approval to join cohort 3 2026 2027 of the early childhood special education EDSE transition from child development services CDS to RSU5 Kelly and Cara. Thank you.

Okay, I just have to show you so I go up.

Okay, so at long last we come to it.

I need a cookie for this. You might need a cookie. Okay. So, long story here and we've been sort of following it week by week, but we Sorry. Bigger.

Make it bigger. Well, let me We don't need all those blank lines.

How am I going to make this bigger? It didn't like it.

Oh, it doesn't like it. Here, we'll do this. We'll try this one. Yeah.

Is that gonna work? Because then you can see it. Yeah.

I'll I'll move it around. So without recap without recapping every single detail that I've already shared several times in previous weeks when we did our TRA task force process which we really we did for the sake of getting lots of input and transparency we didn't know that we were working with a faulty spreadsheet from the state. We didn't know that until just beginning of last month. And we had of course in that process received guidance from the state several times about what it would take what we felt was quote reasonable and necessary unquote to assume responsibility for four year olds for next year. This is of course to take on the special education responsibilities.

Um upon discovering their spreadsheet error in January. Go ahead, Sam.

We um had to do lots of last minute planning and thinking with them and and collaboration to try to make adjustments based on their new guidance. So, the new guidance from the state was not only working with a much smaller number, but it was also much more granular about what they would approve in our budget.

We had we had run our plan by them before and had gotten their approval based on the original numbers they gave us. But when it was evident to them that they had less money to work with to give not just to us but to other school districts, um the guidance that came from them all of a sudden became much more specific about what they would fund.

So, we finally got just a few days ago final confirmation from the folks at DOE that after a lot of back and forth um what we what they will approve. So, this is what I'm bringing to you and let me see if I can make this understandable.

One of the biggest needs that we have is a director administrative oversight. Um the state has determined now, they had not determined this in December, but they've determined now that they will really only support in the early childhood allocation a certain proportion of administrative time to o oversee that program. And what you see up there is 0.2 of an administrative position we are we can put into the early childhood education fund which is from the state. the rest.

Can I just ask a question? Is this um this entity that is uh making these determinations, are they the ones that also have administered it in the past?

Um no. That's a great question.

No. So, who's administered it in the past is CDS and they're diverting that funding from CDS to school districts. So it's this is coming into the DOE in a way that it did not before.

I see. So it's CDS's uh CDS's efforts that they are downplaying uh not their own.

Sure.

So what you see up there, the cost of $176,000 for an ECSE coordinator. I just want to be clear that is not the salary of an ECSE coordinator. It's the salary plus the benefits package. Um, and that is at the level of an assistant principal in our district.

So, we can push 0.2 of that into the early childhood fund. The rest would have to come from the local fund. Now the our local taxes, but spoiler alert, they have at the same time approved other expenses for staff that we are already paying out of our local budget to go into the CDS money.

So all of that is broken down in this spreadsheet. So one of the needs that we have is a 282B teacher. That's a special education teacher for a special purpose classroom.

Most of that would go into the early childhood education fund. 02 of it would have to come out of local. We've asked for two specialed edexs to um serve in that program. Those would be brand new on top of the edteex we already have.

Those would be fully in the early childhood fund. Um a speech language pathologist.

We already have a speech language pathologist serving preK and that person is paid for it right now entirely out of local money, but we can put 0.9 of that salary into the early childhood fund. So there is some offset with the director in in what you're seeing here. Um we would have to set aside some money for contractors like psychologist, teacher of the deaf, etc.

um that could come out of the special allocation, some hours for drivers, and um another addition which they had not told us they would approve back in December, but they have told us now is a portion of a general ed prek teacher could go into the special ed early childhood fund. And that is because many of the kids with IEPs and preK need to have access to a general education setting for their least restrictive environment. So that is a half of that salary could go into early childhood. So what it all shakes down to if you see the orange square, the $17,300 is a net impact to the local taxpayer.

Um, but what we're getting out of that is to be able to enter the cohort in a separate pot of money that is not reflected here that's 100% from the state. We can get all kinds of necessary equipment and assessments and curriculum to get that started. Um and we're adding a an assistant special education director most of whose duties would be in early childhood despite the fact that we have to break the budget down by line line items in that way.

So that is an impact that Kelly and I have talked that 17,000 that is an impact that Kelly and I have talked about and feel is fairly represented in what we are bringing to you for the budget as it is because many of those costs in the budget and Kelly and I could say this better than I could are estimated staffing costs staffing costs.

So this represents a good deal for the district. It does enable us to join the cohort at this time and start most importantly I think when we focus entirely on money we lose sight of the work and the earlier we start this work with kids the more we're serving the kids who need it and that will pay off in the long run with kids being getting their needs met earlier getting earlier intervent inter interventions and being able to move out of special education earlier um thus saving us money over call.

Um, is it fair to say that um, obviously having the director on next year to cover, you know, the the launch of the program, that is a position that wouldn't necessarily need to increase in the following year when we add the three-year-olds. So, would we be able to shift a larger percentage of their time into that funding formula because they're supporting potentially twice as many kids going from four-year-olds to four and three?

I think that's a possibility because what they're telling us right now is Is that far too logical? Um, sorry.

I want to be really respectful. Um, I think the folks at DOE are really doing their best with a hard situation and they were very gracious when that spreadsheet error was discovered and they they owned that it was on them and it put us in a hard position. The guidance they're giving us specifically is that they can only improve cost based on a per pupil count. And you know, I the back and forth that we had with them is my explanation to them that we're we're trying to build a program that's not just for the four-year-olds that come next year, but for the threes that come the year after that we're promising to take on. And with the fours, we do have an early childhood intervention team already on staff that meets most of that need. where we really need help is the oversight to build the architecture for the threes that will come. Um, and that's where we still have a lot of work to do. I think that that person that we hire, even though it says 02 of their salary would come out of that allocation, most of their work right now will be in building an early childhood program that we will be mandated to take on in 2028.

And then potentially once that's up and running, I mean, you know, essentially having the the cost of a an assistant principal for 50 kids, right, which we wouldn't typically have. We wouldn't have a, you know, we wouldn't have a school with 50 kids and say, "You guys need an assistant principal." Obviously, it's not apples to apples because these are kids that have higher higher needs.

Um but you know is that something where some of that could be could be shared since the cost is being shared with the local side could be shared with more you know general general special ed support.

I I think so. Yes.

Yeah. I don't want to overpromise because the I I just have to be mindful that this is all coming from from the state and laws I don't think that it would take a change in the law to do this. Laws can change, administrations can change. We will have a new administration in Augusta within you know a year by 2028. So um we we are basing all of this on the assumption that we have a mandate to fulfill by 2028.

No, I was just thinking I mean sort of less about the state and where they're going with with early childhood education. More thinking we can't really hire a point 2 administrator. Nobody's going to do that. Right? we would get a full full person which the maj the majority of their time certainly in the next year or two is going to be about building out this program but presumably there would be some capacity after that to support the the district at large as a special education yes for sure that my hope is that we definitely need a whole person who has extensive knowledge about early childhood and special education and that we could have that person now build this program for us but also be able to assist us with special education in general. That's that's what I was hoping for.

Okay. Thank you.

And and thank you guys for kind of finding a way that that works within their parameters but also gets the needs for the program met to get it launched in next year. I know that was no easy feat and a lot of back and forth. And I guess my last question, um, how confident are we that they're gonna stick to that?

Well, Sandy Flack, who is the person at DOE that we've done most of the discussion with, emailed me yesterday and was pretty effusive about this plan.

Um, so we were very specific in making sure, you know, the reason we didn't do this a few weeks ago is that I didn't want to bring you numbers that were not accurate.

I am confident based on what I'm told from the authorities that this is accurate and doable. Okay.

And this is on recorded. So Chris, um I see you added the driver hours. Is there any other transportation requirements for this? So there are just on our regular pre-K buses that we're running right now or um it can operate on those buses right now because we are meeting most of the need already through our current preK program. I do think when we talk about three-year-olds, we have more thinking to do. But one of the costs that we also had had in our original ask for this pot of money was for a van. And we've been told, take the van out of this pot of money, but there's another pot of money that is 100% state funded where you can get the van.

And remind me, um, not necessarily this pot of money, but the pot of money that would contribute towards our supplies and materials, the other pot, um, that would we would need to build out this program. um we are at an advantage if we start this year because if we don't that money is going to be distributed to other programs correct so that that is correct and and others in the room who've worked with this Ted Ted's here somewhere right hey Ted I'll I'll try it but if I save me if I say this the wrong way so when this entire proposition was put forward there was a special pot of money for districts that joined early and the incentive was if you join early and commit to taking this over from CDS there is more financial support for you to get all that stuff that you just mentioned. So the earlier you join the more incentive there is for startup support that a lot of that money is is dwindling. So there is not as much of a promise if we wait that we will get be able to cash in on that.

Is is there a promise that if we do join this year we can get that money or is that like I'm coming up with numbers but like let's say there's you know $3 million left in that and all of a sudden there's a $7 million ask and they're like actually you only get you know 37th of your money if I'm if I'm completely honest. So, that could happen. Um, because I can't stand here and tell you I that I know how much money they have in that fund or how they're allocating it. All I can tell you is that the the promise is the earlier you join, the more likelihood that there is that that money is available. So, what happens if it's not?

So, what happens if we go, "Okay, we need a van, we need chairs, we need tables, we need big fat crayons, whatever we need, and they go, oh, sorry, money's gone, and we have committed and now we have to fund those things because we have four-year-olds showing up." That is the case.

Okay. So, what are we doing? Because if we find out after we adopt the budget, well, Kelly and I would sit back. Kelly, Alicia, and I would sit back and think of what we would need to ask for and we would have to come to you with a plan for that.

I don't have that backup plan now. I do have an assurance from them that that money is there for us now.

Do we have a I see the face you're hopefully I'm not on camera. I'm over here. But um uh do we have a sense of what that number could be? like what do we think the sort of startup costs for this program are that we expect? I don't have it right at my fingertips, but we had that worked out in our earlier proposal and itemized. I don't know if you had it handy, Kelly.

Check your pile. I'm just curious of kind of, you know, what was stuff that we would like to have that would be nice to be able to get us off and running at a great start and versus what do we absolutely must have in order to take this over when the kiddos start show up on the first day of school. And to me, that what do we have to have is the potential we're on the hook for if they say there's no money left. And I'm not saying we shouldn't do this.

I'm just saying we should know what that number is in case we have to find it somehow.

So, it's there's curriculum assessments in PD um adding up about $3,200.

Um Kelly can find that.

There's $43,000 for a van. There is a special request form for a van. Um there's car seats and boosters. They add up to about $380.

That's like one car seat. What do you guys buy? I mean, we have them at 150 a piece. Okay.

Um, there's some technology equipment and PD. There's some iPads, some teacher and staff computers, and some programs.

All of that together is about 10 and a half thousand. So, compared to these other line items, they're not those aren't hugely expensive. I mean, the biggest one is the van, right? Correct.

So, if we if we had to, could we do it with the number of vans we have now? Do we think it would be tight? Yeah, it would be tight for sure. And the and well, I mean, this is just worst case scenario, you know. Not that they never go back on what they're saying.

They're important questions and I I don't know if it like makes me look any better, but it's we don't have the answer. Not because we haven't done our homework. It's just because the answer isn't clear.

Yeah. We just don't have it yet. We just don't Okay.

The state doesn't Yeah. I just think it's important for us to know what, you know, we could potentially be looking to cover if we had to. Yeah.

How quickly after this is approved does the funding actually get dispersed?

So there is the option to have the funding for it's dispersed quarterly.

They they have extended an option to us to to disperse the quarter one bit of money early. I think as early as April.

Now, I don't know that that really helps us that much because getting we will need that money at the end of the year. So, um it's coming it. Yes, that's true. It does make it start coming even if you don't plan on it.

What about the um the little pot of money for the the the the special money?

The special money. Like is that like can we can we start sending in our requests and invoices tomorrow?

Not tomorrow. Ted, do you happen to know?

I'm just gonna ask you to come up to the mic because the folks at home can't hear you in the back.

Um so that stuff we had a site visit from Lori Whitmore.

She's a director of preschool programming. She went through the all the prek rooms. Um she's she made a list of what she believes we could use. We she won't come back until the commitment form has been signed.

At that point, she will order stuff for us and deliver it for that that amount of money that that stuff. You don't have to pay first. They're going to order it, deliver it, help set that up. The stuff that we want to um cost through a one-time allocation that can start at April 1 um through the early allocation funds, which takes away from the first quarter, which is July.

One thing to keep in mind is July. We you don't have any students starting responsibility till September 1st. So you don't have a lot of expense um for uh July and August potentially. So that the money you do take from there you may not have to push down the line and reckon with a year from June.

So so things like a van that we would need. So a van is a special requisition form. Okay.

It's outside all all three of these funding streams. Um, and it's existed for longer than this initiative, so that's probably going to stick around.

Um, again, I don't I don't know, but Okay. So, that's not specific to early early childhood that I know. No, it was around before that. So, yeah, wouldn't be at least these three funds that are coming through this law.

This is probably a question I probably should have asked before we got all the way to this point, but does this taking over the CDS? It prompted the question when you said they won't were not responsible until September 1. Are most of these kids extended school year kids that we would now have to have a preschool program running through the summer?

So, um I don't know what most of them means.

There will be a significant portion that will be ESY. Um there are some stuff that the EIT does already. Um I think one of them contracts to do services for students. Um so yes, short answer is yes. You'll have to have a ESY program that's available. It has to be um six weeks in length. I don't know when those six weeks are that I don't actually you know what that means I need to check that that is the law right now for CDS or but as it transfers over I don't know if that comes with it so good question they will you will need to provide ESY services we'll have to figure that out um it sounds like they're already doing some of that right and it I mean I guess what I would want to make sure of is that our staff that are already providing services to these kids um are on contracts that don't require necessarily summer. So there could be incremental costs to to that and want to make sure because that would be I presume covered by the programming cost or no that's already built into how much they're giving us per student. So the difference is on us to figure out.

Yes. Um those but the services themselves when they go up should increase.

So there's that high cost allocation which is reserved for kids that are high cost in for one student that's a high cost and then if it pushes over the total allocation for the year then it kicks in. So if there's enough ESY work that even if those kids aren't um high cost in their the amount of needs that they need in their IEP that if that amount kicks it up above what the quarter allocation was then there would be more money. We could recapture some of that cost. Okay. Thank you, Y.

Um Tom, if we if we uh approve this tonight, um is there a relatively uh is there a relatively straightforward way to present um this uh as an accompaniment to the budget going forward for this year? Is there a way that we can kind of like like at what point I guess it'd be helpful to know like is there a point before we pass the budget where we're passing the budget with knowing exactly what we are uh signing up for or is that's likely okay because you wouldn't be voting on the budget till March and so we would certainly by that time we would have more information back from the state.

Um, so at the moment I can, you know, I can share there would be that $17,000ish cost. Um, and we would have an answer about all the other special things I would hope that they're approving.

Okay, great. Thank you.

I think we should probably include that like in your future as we look at the budget. I think that needs to probably get added in there so we're capturing it.

I would I I was think Kelly and I were talking about this. I would put it under the additions part.

Valerie, I'm gonna borrow Ted's phrase and say since we get to do this, um, is the intent to Michelle's point for outfitting our special ed classroom in the short term to keep that off the budget to include it in the budget and then anything that we get reimbursed falls away? How are we managing those funds in our budget?

So, the technicalities of that I would have to ask Kelly about, but the intent is to keep keep it off the budget as much as possible and in the CDS money.

Tom, I'm wondering the money that we're getting, is that a year after year after year?

It's quarterly and it's based on student numbers per quarter.

Okay. So this we're guaranteed that we're getting money every year.

I mean guarantee might not be Yeah. We expect to this would be um annually and it's based on the amount of students that we can project for the first quarter of next year. So you know by the end of October and we can't we're not allowed to project having more students as the year goes on. So it's a projection based on what we are expecting for the first quarter.

Do you know what the numbers are at this point?

Yeah, I think it was 25 kiddos.

I don't remember off the top. It was right around 25 kiddos. That's what I remember also. Yeah.

Yeah. I think it's going to be really interesting when we start guessing how many three-year-olds we have showing up.

like the four-year-olds is a little bit different because we kind of have screeners and prek and um I think the three-year-olds is going to be three-year-olds I I there's a lot of unknowns y with that my sense is whatever we can quantify there are actually more that will come because we have a program when we don't now right but I do think and correct me if I'm wrong um to your question Karen if we have to you know we have to say 25 but if 30 show up. We do get to recapture that in like the future quarters. We can catch up because we have more kids. We can't we can't assume we're going to have 30 and hope they come. We can say 25 because that's what we have confirmation or information for, but if 30 do show up, we are able to like capture those numbers. Kelly?

Yeah. So, that raises a question. Are we sort of budgeting a certain amount of space for a certain capacity looking forward to the future?

Right now with the four-year-olds, it's pretty easy because we have the capacity to absorb the numbers that we will be getting. That's because we already have prek. And you know, if we compare it to this year, we are already serving three quarters of the kids with IEPs in our district through our existing prek. So, we can tap into what we already have to to make that work for next year. I think the real question that we have to do a lot of work over the ensuing year here to figure out as three-year-olds because we don't as of right now have a space to to put them in.

But more on that next week when we talk about the longer range vision and the only I think added classroom for next year would be the new special ed prek but there is a space at Mor Street for that. So yes, right now we we are proposing to add a special ed classroom that's a special purpose classroom. Um it's for children who would have a higher level of need who and if we don't do that we would face having to send those children out somewhere else where they could access that which would be a cost to us. Um so we can make space for that at the moment at more street. It will be tight, but we can make that work and we can then serve those kids and it will be a lower cost and with our own people.

I look forward to hearing more about that next week. Then other questions on the motion on the floor, which is to join cohort three based on the information we have right now.

Seeing none, are folks ready for a vote? You got the motion on the second? Yep. Okay, great. All those in favor?

None opposed. Thank you. And thank you to the group that was involved in that task force to to Tom, to Erica, to Tim.

Um I do that every time. Ted, sorry. I don't know why I do that. I apologize.

Um just to I mean this was a lot of work. and Kelly, this was more work than anticipated when it started. Um, as it always is. So, um, so thank you for everybody's hard work on that.

I kind of like sitting in the dark over there. Durham Bacon. Durham vacant. That's me.

All right. So, um, new business on the agenda is item 13, the district scorecard. And Erica is going to present that to us.

Am I moving again? You might want to go back to the dark. Back to your darkness.

Sometimes imaginary. Sometimes you're not an island. Thank you.

It's way cooler than So, in your packets, you had um the district scorecard and then you had a presentation um for career and college readiness. Um what wasn't in your packet, Jenny's call, um is that this this presentation specifically um about the key findings in the scorecard, which we're going to rip tonight because this is the last scorecard presentation. We just we're going to evolve into a different style of presentation going forward, unless that's not no longer what you want. Um but uh this is the last presentation of the scorecard as we've known it for 10 or 12 years now forever. Um so uh the first findings I'd like to share with you tonight um are with are coming from the traditional scorecard report that you um are familiar with if you've been on the board for a while. Um and I wanted to just caveat this entire presentation with these are standardized test scores um and not students children are not standardized humans and so there is you know an element of there isn't a test in here that's that's appropriate for all kids all the time. So we're working with data that is you know in a human environment um that comes through as maybe it's not always the right fit or um the best way to measure our profession is a science I believe and science there in science there is measurement so we are trying to measure things and to your earlier point there are other things we could probably measure to paint other pictures or shine light on other areas so I'll um caveat some of these um data pieces with more of that but just an overarching um uh you know statement about standardization. Um so this is all again coming from your uh scorecard as you knew it. Um so the graduation rate uh for you the state average I believe is trending at about 86% so we're in a good spot in comparison. Um the scorecard does a lot of comparisons. So you'll see that throughout this one.

Um the scorecard has uh continuously elevated for you the fountains and panel reading scores which are our benchmark assessments that we are utilizing K5 primarily. Um and um these data carry over into the new report that I'll be sharing. Um but um you can see the trends there and you received this in advance. So I'm I'll pause at the end of this one and ask for your questions.

Uh the main throughear assessment. So in the scorecard there was an emphasis on the throughear. Um Maine's had quite a moving target when it comes to what uh how they're measuring students in Maine and where those cut scores are falling.

Um so it's frankly less reliable than um hitching on to what the assessment uh creators have indicated as national norms. So we're going to be paying closer attention to that in going forward. So this is where we stand per the main three-year assessment which again has some challenges in terms of um validity and reliability longitudinally.

Um the mainstate science assessment has also evolved over the years. Um and the tricky thing I just want to caveat uh so the new assessment the new instrument is attached to the next generation science standards um which are now legislated by the state of Maine. We were a little bit slower to the game than other states. So this this uh was then passed not too too long ago and there wasn't a ton of implementation support for this from the state. So districts have sort of taken it on themselves and taken like different approaches to it. But the big challenge with the main state science assessment is that the approach is interdisciplinary. So earthlife, physical, engineering, all the things are in one assessment every year. And that's not necessarily how we're teaching science. So, a child sitting for an assessment um that's exposing them to content that they may or may not have been experiencing relative to the the assessment. So, this is a tricky one. Um but we're still trending better than state average.

Um PSAT and SAT, I really want to highlight that um we uh are not a state that does this statewide any longer. So when we compare ourselves with the state average that becomes no longer a super credible like norming group or linking study. Um and so this is um how we compare to the state amongst colleagues schools who also administer the PSAT and SAT universally meaning for all students. We do do that um in grades in grade 11. Um, and that's why you can see that when you put all the kids in the pool, the scores are um comparatively a little bit lower. Um, I did do a statewide study to see where we fall um on this uh in terms of offering it universally. So, we subsidize that locally and we do it universally in grade 11. Um, uh, I had 23 responses from high schools across Maine, including Bangor, Portland, Augusta, South Portland, Ellsworth, Auburn, Bifford, Brunswick, Kerman, and many others. Um, and uh, universally we have um 11 of of those, sorry, uh, six of those administering uh, universally PSAT and five of those administering universally um, SAT. in 11th grade. So, just as a comp.

Um, and then this one is an interesting one I think we're going to want to follow um going forward is that persistence rate uh once kiddos metriculate into their first and maybe even more importantly their second year of um post-secary studies. Um, if we go back to these scores, we'll dive into PSAT and SAT a little bit more, but the uh threshold is uh meeting or exceeding a predicted likelihood to perform successfully in a 100 level class with a grade of a C or better. Um so this is the SAT and PSAT cut scores are intended to predict whether a child is ready to uh persist successfully meaning earning a grade of a C or better in a 100 level coursework. Right? So then when you go into um when you go into the advanced placement and post-secary persistence rate um we can you know sort of make connections that readiness matters potentially for students. I will say that this data set is coming from 2022 and these are COVID years and a lot more kiddos would have uh taken us up on the um state subsidized access to two-year colleges, right? So, we've got other kids in this data set that might not have otherwise been there and it was COVID years. So, there's like it'll be interesting to follow this going forward. So, I take this one with a grain of salt. Um again we can do some questions key takeaways.

Um those were highlighted for you um in the in the data set. But um uh I did want to point out that on pages five and six there was an error on a header. Um, and that is um, let me maybe I can open it up here. Just wanted to show you.

So, if you are looking at your packet, I just wanted to make sure in full transparency here that there was an error.

Oh, it was corrected on this one that I have. My apologies. But here, if you're looking at these columns on page five and six, the 24 25 was reading 23 24 when it says spring count in grades 3, four, five, six, and then on to the next page. Are you seeing that in your packet potentially? Yeah, just wanted to point that one out.

Okay. So, questions about the scorecard data as presented knowing that some of it lives in the next presentation as well.

Um just just so I understand uh the PSAT and the SAT um sheet that you had. Yeah.

So, the test is the same for 10th and 11th graders. It's the same test for PSAT.

Yes. Um, so the but the cut scores are different.

Uh, so the PSAT is a different assessment from the SAT.

No, no, no. I'm I'm saying so we have PSAT grade 10 and PSAT grade 11 given in the same year, that's the same test, right? So if you have an 11th grader sitting here and a 10th grader, they're taking the same test. Yes. Right.

So I'm trying to um but you know, we don't have their scores on here. we have the percent meeting or exceeding the benchmark. So based on the 92.7 for for 10th graders and dropping to 66.2, maybe that's a cohort issue. Um or is it that the cut scores are different to be meeting or exceeding for a 10th grader as it is for meeting or exceeding as an 11th grader?

Oh, great question. Um so we don't require our 10 we don't offer it universally. We don't subsidize it in grade 10. Okay. So, the only ones taking a grade 10 that choose to do it to engage in it.

Okay. Okay. That makes more sense because I was that was a huge swing, right? So, when you all had asked for a presentation in September and I came back in the next meeting there, if you might recall that I showed those differences, that'll appear in the next report as well.

Indeed. Uh that is the case for grade 10 for the PSAT. And then we have a an optional participation for grade 12 SAT.

Thank you.

Not showing on on the scorecard for whatever reason. Don't know. Yeah.

Yes.

On the um uh postsecary um those percentages are both of the graduating class, right? Or is in other words 55.2% 2% of the graduating class continue on. It's not 55.2% of the 69.5% that go of the class of 20.

Oh, that would be really Yeah. I was always I was like I was like like something's going Yeah. Great.

Excellent. Great. I mean, not excellent but better.

Yeah. And part of this is really important because readiness to persist successfully in 100 level coursework also matters a lot for financial aid.

So, um, not, uh, remedial coursework, not 100 level coursework for students who need it, is not covered through FAFSA.

It's just a barrier potentially. Yeah.

Do we see any trends with um our students who were entering school during COVID and academic learning versus those kids coming in now or kids who are already here like when we were shut down are the is that two to three year cohort kind of performing differently than everyone else?

That's really interesting question. Um, you're going to see a little bit of that in the next one. Um, but I I'm afraid some of that data may take more time. If you're looking at it from like all the way out through post-secary in the lag in which we get this these data, I think I mean, yeah, I haven't studied those specifically here. Um, so like birth year 2015s who would have been kindergarteners in 2020 kind of like watching them go through time. I'm thinking kids who were learning to read while wearing a mask.

Yeah, there are some trends I because you all had asked about some trend data in in September. So, I did prepare some of those for the next slide deck. Um, but I'm not sure it totally captures or answers your question.

Um, we can look at that more. Ready for the next one? Okay.

So um so in September um and through the work of the strategic planning committee there's been a a lot of talk about readiness um and so the the indicator for readiness when it comes to academic achievement is like the benchmark that um would be career and college ready an indicating of career and college readiness. So the assessments that we use from third grade up do have those benchmark they they have studied what is the predictive level of meeting or exceeding expectations for career and college readiness. So we are able to use what we have from our data sets to look at that from third grade onward.

and the assessments that we are using.

Um I don't know that the Fountain and Panel benchmark assessment does a um does a career and college ready predictive indicator but um I I maybe I need to look into that more. Um but so our third grade assessment onward would be the NWA primarily which many of you are familiar with and then the PSAT and SAT have that. For the purpose of this presentation, um I'm looking at the subgroup called uh economically disadvantaged. Specifically, the scorecard previously had gotten into a subgroup of um students receiving special education services. That felt a little bit global because not all students receiving special education services are receiving them in academic areas and not necessarily in both academic areas. And so this is from um you know from looking at our data this feels more important and um you know we can always look at the other subgroups as well but trying to stay at just just one for right now for a through line. U we obviously look at the other subgroups. Um okay so you're going to see economically disadvantaged as a subgroup and then I'm attempting to offer you some cohort data that you had requested earlier.

Um this is just another way of looking at that. Um these are these are where the assessments are administered universally.

And again you see our PSAT and SAT commitments. Sorry 10th is checked off.

It shouldn't be um because it's not for PSAT. It's not um un it's universally available but it's not universally administered.

Okay. Um, fountain and panel reading data. This is a carryover from the last report. There's nothing really different here.

Um this is that same data set um with a descriptive and uh the dotted line then is going to be the district um total average.

What we're shooting for when you start to see these line charts is like we want 80% or more of our students at that level. Like that's the goal.

And if you're looking at like MTSS structures, that's that's the goal.

Um prepared a year-by-year comparison for the Fontus and Panel assessment.

we've just updated to the most current copyright of this assessment instrument and so um we're staying with um most current research in those tools and um we've been working on implementing that this year that again um the FMP is a K5 assessment As we move into our NEOA data, this is where things start to fall on that career and college ready indicator line rather than the state sort of moving target of what is meeting or exceeding the state's expectations. So it's staying true using our longitudinal data still. Um so NEIA has always had this indicator. Um and that is when a student is performing at the 61st percent or better. The bands in Numa are 0 to 20, 21 to 40, 41 to 60, 61 and up. And there's a band above 61. But for the purpose of career and college readiness, this is looking at the band of 61st or better. Um, reading trends per NWA from grades 3 to 10. Um, if you remember from September, I caution you grade 10 caveat. Um, it's a tricky um, application of NWA, a little bit of a stretch in terms of how that test is intended to be used. Um, but this is what our state uses. Again, no longer the SAT. We used to be an SAT state.

These are our math trends per NWA.

Then again, these um PSAT and SAT assessment um no longer really worried so much about the the comparing to the state of Maine because it's not universally utilized as a high school assessment instrument anymore.

And then the career and college trends when looking at these different assessments. So we like I pulled in FNP the fountainis and panel piece because it as are they meeting grade level expectations. So these are students at or above grade level expectations per the fountain and panel NWA map with both reading and math. Sorry that's a lot of lines. And then the PSAT, um, you see the differences there in grades 10 and 11. 10 being that elective, but we subsidize. Um, and SAT, um, I'm only showing you grade 11 because the grade 12 was a was, um, like it's the same story as with the PSAT, but probably fewer because by that point, a lot of kids are already in their application stage, not taking us up on it.

And then um pulling in uh the career and college ready snapshot across all grades trying to create a through line across different instruments reading and math.

Um this is a cohort analysis.

Um, so you're going to start to see those bands of cohorts A, B, and C. Um, and their graduating classes and the grades spans that are represented. I know you've had some time with this beforehand, so happy to answer any questions you have um, about looking at reading data across K5 and then reading data 38. Again, we don't use the end of UEA until grade three. So that's why that's starting there.

Um the changes across those cohorts, so how much those kiddos have grown across their cohort band. Um and the small print reads, each bar represents the percentage point change in career college ready rates for a single cohort of students tracked over multiple years. Positive values indicate improvement.

For example, the plus 20.6 means that 20.6% more students in that cohort met the benchmark at the end of the tracking period compared to the beginning of the period. Um the Fountainis panel cohorts spanned five years and the NWA cohorts span four years just for the fine print piece of that.

Um and then this subgroup, the economically disadvantaged subgroup, we are getting more tuned on the identification of um economically disadvantaged needs um as a district, which is fabulous. Um but for these data, you will see that there is a range of like our identifications depending on grade levels and creating some volatility in the the data. So, um I'm hoping this becomes more steady over the years. Um but, um yeah, just a note that when it's 100% it's just a super small sample size.

We tend to as a best practice not present anything that's that's a group size uh under 10 10 or lower.

Um, this is that same kind of map but with the economically disadvantaged subgroup represented as well.

And then um in a line representation for reading and math as as represented through NWA and the comparison for students who um are meeting that economically disadvantaged threshold.

Um and then an equity comparison in the SAT.

the cohort in reading overtime, the cohort in math over time, and then a summary of what you probably saw as well, but in case it's helpful.

Um, and a note again that the PSAT and SAT uh vary across Maine because the SAT is no longer the state's assessment, nor is the PSAT.

I will add one important reason for us to continue or to support I won't predict the future to support the PSAT is that the at this at this grade level it is also the NMSQT qualifier. So that's the national merit scholar qualifying assessment. So that's one reason why um schools uh maintain access to it whether through universal or elective subsidy and I'm happy to answer any questions you have a question about the well thank you for putting all this together it's a lot um and for breaking out the key takeaways for us as well. Um, as far as the areas for attention and the first two there about math, are there some um, guesses as to why those have gone down? Has the curriculum changed? Has the test changed?

Love to hear more about that.

Um, so this is my first year in the district, so there's probably a lot of context that I don't have. I do know that with most standardized assessment, there is a matter of timing of like when is a child learning things in a curriculum versus when is the assessment being administered and do those things line up? Um, so we should definitely, you know, consider that we're not teaching to the test and SAT isn't really that kind of test, you know, so we're not taking like released items and like, well, at least not in school cramming towards them, right? I suppose we can do that privately. So there's that part, right? Um and then um the fact that it is no longer this the state's assessment. So it's it's got a different weight um and post-secondary institutions are no longer on mass requiring it.

The SAT is no longer like 100% required, right? They're giving other options. So maybe the the gravity of the assessment um other than that I think we have work to do across the board in math.

So you know there's um there is systemic math conversation happening the need for math programming committee was identified last year. We've been doing that work and we'll be bringing to you later this year a presentation on some of the systems level work that we're doing with math. Um, but uh the SAT is not a best fit assessment for all kids at that time.

Yeah, we see this equity gap pretty much year after year and it doesn't really seem to change too too much year over year. And I'm just curious what the thought is about how we address this kind of persistent gap, meaning the economically disadvantaged gap. Um so it's our MTSS or formerly called RTI systems um or both called RTI MTSS uh response to intervention and multi-ter systems of support creating comprehensive um timely um intervention systems and tuning those through continuous improvement um not just on the remediation end but on on the end where kids uh need more um keeping them engaged as well. So, um that is the work of MTSS.

Um yeah, thank you so much again for pulling this together. This is so helpful. Do we have um any data on um declared uh concentrations of students when they are um leaving? I guess I'm I'm asking because um if there was any kind of it'd be interesting to look at the relationship between you know if um if half the kids leaving uh Freeport High say they want to go into engineering um and then we're seeing these math scores and then half of the you know whatever like then we're seeing a drop are we seeing a drop in it'd be interesting to see if we're seeing a drop in the areas that could be traced in any way back to these kind of indicators, right, of sort of saying like um do you think we have anything like that kicking around?

Um in terms of where they what they do postsecary well yeah like um yeah I mean is there any do we ask students what they're thinking of studying when they leave is or do we have do we know what um their concentrations are? I know you don't declare one in freshman year necessarily, but um I don't know. It just it just it just struck me that the that that data point is concerning the number of that don't go on to um uh persist in the second year. Um particularly at the two-year colleges, that was um that was really disheartening. Um and I was just sort of curious whether there was any sort of way we could link those. I mean again it points to we need u some work do some work in math but um just curious.

Yeah. To your point, declaration of a major in the first two years of of school in post-secary is variable depending on the institution. Uh liberal arts schools will often say you don't have to declare two third or fourth year. So like we could get a lot of like not super reliable data but um we do have um disagregated data. Engineering lives in the science standard. So it's earthlike physical and engineering. Um and we do have disagregated data about um all of those domains uh that we can look at. And then we have disagregated data for um the map uh the map of sorry the NWA map assessments that um shows us the domains of math um in which trending is needing our attention. So we are able to look at that um as well um and um know that because it is attached to career and college ready indication whether they're actually ready to persist successfully or not per that assessment. There are certainly other ways to do it but we would need to be very scientific in our approach.

Yeah. I'm not sure if that answered your question. So you're saying we need math skills to figure out about the math skills. That's what I'm hearing.

Thank you, Erica. One thing that I learned about on the curriculum committee was more about the RTI and MTSS and just how much of the uh general classroom should be served like all different tiers. And I was wondering if you could just discuss that a little bit more for the whole board and how you see particularly math where we're lagging behind a little bit. How you feel like that can be addressed in the general ed classroom as opposed to the pull out method where it's being done now as pull out and by ed I'll stop talking now.

Sure. I think that's my question.

Yeah. Um so multi-tered systems of support uh typically have three tiers.

Um it's tier one that's universal that happens in the classroom setting. That is um kids who are like somewhere within grade level range. Typically they're um needing just some like real time support. Tier two tends to be a kiddo who's like about a yearish or like more than like below grade level in the year into the year prior. at some part of that year prior. Um and then tier three tends to be kiddos who are approaching two years below grade level tends to be um where those interventions are supported is what is different in different settings. So tier one should be in the classroom setting. Um depending on the human resources, uh tier 2 is often with push-in support in the regular classroom setting. Tier three is needing to have a very specific isolated skill set intervention in a small group setting outside of the classroom because it doesn't fit in with just the sort of business as usual in the general education in that classroom setting. Um, so those three tiers are really important and I think us uh the work that we're doing right now to make sure that we know like what are the non-negotiables for grade level expectations is really critical when you're moving in to do intervention on grade level expectations. Um so we're getting clear about um the non-negotiables at grade level. Um and then what are the resources we are pooling both human and print um and sometimes digital uh to support kids in each of those tiers. Um so our classroom teachers are doing a lot of work every day. It looks really um natural in the classroom setting. You would you might not know that tier one intervention is happening. Those small groups with teachers at the tables if you've seen them and and that is very um like organic. Tier 2 is very targeted inside the classroom saying this group of kiddos are really needing this skill or else by the end of the year they're going to be yet more behind. So we're going to like really focus on that. And then tier three is um we know that they're not likely to make grade level expectations and we need to capture further back down the line. Um, and throughout those tiers, we are serving multilingual learners and students identified with IEP support as well. So, MTSS serves all students.

So, if you were thinking about it as a pyramid, then uh, multilingual and special education run through all of those tiers.

Did that answer your question?

I think uh well there's kind of one part further I think that I was trying to get at um and that sorry it's getting late at that time where I start fading away um is how can we use the MTSS or maybe better utilize it I don't know in thinking about um trying to address these inequities in the classroom because I think for me I think oh well we need more staff we need more people to come in but from what I've heard from you at curriculum committee. It's like, well, maybe, but that's not necessarily how we would do it with MTSS model. And are we I know we're currently doing some of that, but is there a world in which you see us being able to do it more?

Yeah, I think it begins with a whole lot of clarity about what is when is when is the need determined and what is the isolated need for the child. Um, and it's not all about pushing out for support. It's knowing how to support small groups differently. Um, and so with clarity, with a lot of clarity. Um, and we're already good at that. We need more clarity about like the grade level non-negotiables and we're using all the best research out there to um to tune that right now. So, um, we have all the right people And I'm I feel very confident that we have all the right people to get that done um to build those systems.

Thank you.

All right. Thank you, Erica.

You know what happens when I move 18 times? I lose my agenda. I got it. I found it.

Oh, good news, guys. Only eight more things. No, I'm just kidding. Um, okay.

We have no personnel items. So, we are back to public comment. We do have a folks a few folks that hung in there.

So, if you'd like to speak, this is another opportunity. We ask you to come to the microphone, tell us your name, where you live, and three minutes uh is allocated for each person.

And Erica has a paper which tells me we have someone.

I didn't find that on my You can do it after. It's fine.

This is generally when we have like 50 people who show up so we can do it in an orderly fashion. When we have two, we can work it out. All right.

Thank you guys. Long night. I know you guys do this a lot. I do not.

So, I wrote some comments down here. I sent you an email. I'm John Jake, by the way. Um, I'm a parent of a uh 2017 graduate and currently have an 11th grader. I'm a retired teacher. I taught social studies and American history. Mental Valley for a while, which I know you're familiar with. Yeah.

And then I moved on to Falmouth High School. Uh, retired a while ago. I'm sure it was before your time. I was out in the valley quite a while ago. So, um, so I'm very pleased what I heard tonight from the superintendent about increased emphasis on social studies at the middle school. Uh, that's, you know, being a former social studies teacher, it's near and dear to my heart. And I think a lot of what's going on these days is evidence of the lack of social studies education. And uh I am not pointing the finger at Freeport High School or this district or this state necessarily, but just as an overall problem that we have as a nation, you know, needs to be addressed. So I really appreciate all the appreciate all the hard work that you guys put in. These meetings are long and your dedication is appreciated.

It's it's a big job. I appreciate it very much and the community appreciates it. So, um, as you all know, numerous criminal actions by the Trump administration require citizens of conscience to protest. I'm extremely proud of our 150 of our high school students that participated in the recent anti-ICE protest.

I'm sure we're all aware of the fact that we had a large number of students walk out at noon during a school day and march along Main Street up to McDonald's back to the bridge and they missed a couple of classes. Right? So students should be supported to exercise their constitutional rights to protest. Any form of punishment by the school system is unacceptable in my opinion.

These are not normal times and the school board should recognize this. Our high school students know what has happened in Minneapolis. Videos have been watched by millions, millions of teenagers, millions of times. You know, the evidence is out there is what's going on. Uh they know what's in the Epstein files. They read this stuff. It's all available.

and school boards should pass whatever is necessary for students to attend any anti-ICE protest and suffer no repercussions from their school.

Diverge a little bit from my remarks here. So what the consequences were for Freeport High School students that participated, it was an unexcused absence.

pretty small thing, but I I think it's a it's a gesture that I would like from you all to make an excused absence for anybody that participated in that. All they did was get an unexcused absence and if there was a extracurricular activity that they were participating in, they couldn't do it the next day.

I've heard from other parents and other districts that they got three hours of detention.

And I don't think it's really what you all intend to do is to punish students for participating in something like that. So you have to take some action.

You have to either change your policy, create a new policy. You have no policy that covers such a thing. You have I got sent by some of the attendance office form that it was apparently developed, you know, over a decade ago that says that this is our policy if you're going to have your kid out. Well, I taught at Fmouth High School 20 years ago, and it used to tick me off as a teacher when the parents would say, "We're going to Switzerland for a ski trip for a week, March 1st. We just had a paper April vac, you know, vacation in February, and they chose to go at a different time, and I'm supposed to put together, you know, some work for them to do while they're in Switzerland or France or wherever it is." Uh, that's a different circumstance, and that's a different scenario. I do understand being a former teacher, spent many, many years dealing with, you know, parents requests for time off and you have to have rules and all that and kids coming in with Starbucks cups to the first period class late over and over again. I know all of that stuff happens, dealt with it. This is a def definitely a different time that we're living in now and a different scenario. So, please please do something so this is not an unexcused absence for these students. Um, back to my parents here.

I'll I'll just ask you just I know I'm close to the three minutes.

You're over, but I'll let you finish your thought. Let me wrap it up. Let me wrap it up. Thank you.

So, since students are minors, parents permission should be enough for an excused absence to attend. Currently, the school policy does not allow parents to excuse an absence. I think this policy should be changed. uh social studies curriculum needs immediate improvement to cover the crimes of Donald Trump and his administration, particularly the high school curriculum.

As a retired teacher, painfully aware of the fact that my most high school graduates do not study the last 20 or 30 years of American history. Doesn't happen. They never get to it. They never learn the last 20 or 30 years. This is not accepted. So, um I'd also like to comment about what I heard here earlier.

Um, I'd also like to um comment about the proposed proposed elimination of middle school French. Studying enrollment here and surrounding district is a good idea. I'm in agreement that if we're worried about dropping enrollment, cutting out middle school French could lead to unattended consequences, which you brought up. Uh, parents choose this community based on the schools. If you cut middle school French, I think it's not be a good thing. I think you can probably find somewhere else to go for that savings. and I'd like to see the middle school French remain. Both of my children went to the eighth grade Quebec City trip and it would be a great loss to our students. Thank you. And I'm sorry I took time.

That's okay. Thank you, John. Thank you. All right. If you'd like to speak, here's your opportunity.

Okay. I don't want to speak.

Um and Sarah Davis, I don't know. Can you hear me? I don't think Is it on?

Yes. Oh my god. All right. And I'm on camera. Great. Okay. So, um, I'm pretty I'm gonna pull it all out.

Thank you. Okay. So, I don't know how you do this because I'm I can barely stand up. I'm so tired. Um, I um didn't want to talk today, but I heard after Pam's um presentation, I just wanted to clarify a couple things. I'm Sarah Davis. I teach Freeport at I teach French at the Freeport Middle School and I live in Auburn. Um, and I may have to sleep here tonight cuz I'm exhausted. Okay. Um, so first of all, I think this is like the toughest thing for Bill and Pam in my building beyond any other administrator. They're brand new and here they are telling people that they have to go. Um, especially with dinosaurs like me. Uh, and I, um, but I do have a hard time hearing people talk about, you know, really like that it's really just more benefits to all the cuts like, no, it just kind of sucks around, you know, across the board. You don't have to come up with like ways that it's it's helpful and and beneficial to students because it's not.

So, um, it really upsets me to hear like, "Oh, well, it'll be great because we'll have more continuity from, uh, no summer lag from 8th grade Spanish to freshman year," which is absolutely not true. Um, but a couple things. Um, I just want clarifying. Um, I just want to put some clarifying things out there.

Sorry if I'm just tongue tied because I'm exhausted. Um, I am concerned that it's there are only five UA teachers listed in grades seven and eight because that's going to make numbers pretty high, especially uh in art. Um, and I let's see, Spanish numbers have been higher since I've worked at Freeport Middle School, um, which is 20 years.

And before that, we didn't have Spanish for a very long time. Before I arrived at Freeport, it was French. Um, so and I think that's just because globally we have more people speaking Spanish as a first language in the country. In Maine, of course, more people speak French as a first language, but I think parents perception is that their kids should take um Spanish um to be more global citizens. Um I um have a hard time with having just Spanish and eighth grade. Uh and the fact that it would be a core class means every kid has to take it and you need a phenomenal amount of support.

We don't typically get a lot of edte support in our classes. Um, so that's a concern to me. Um, because it's going to be large class sizes with kids of a huge range of ability and and motivation. Uh, I always have kids who are like really into French and really good at it naturally and the same thing with Spanish. So, uh, that's tough for me to make. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Um, oh god.

Okay. Um, couple things. Uh, I really I promise I won't be long. Um, shoot. Uh, I don't actually think that eighth grade rotation works out great for language in terms of continuity. Um, and uh, I do want to make sure that we're keeping students uh, in mind and that should be our ultimate that should always be what comes first. But my other issue is we currently have a 6 Spanish teacher at our school. So, I don't understand where we're going to get a full-time position.

Um, I didn't know if you were aware of that, but so that means you're going to be hiring you're adding to that Spanish position in order to have it in the core classes. So, it just I just that that was the biggest thing to me. It's like, well, where's that going to come from?

um because our current Spanish teacher um that position was cut when Amanda Robson left Spanish to teach to do GT and so Rey uh turned the Spanish position into a point six and I started teaching world cultures which is Spanish and French in sixth grade. So every kid gets Spanish and French in sixth grade at Freeport Middle School. Um and then they get Spanish, French or JMG at seventh and eighth grade. Does that make sense? Okay. And I think I'm sorry. I'm really sorry. Uh, special ed students, uh, art numbers. Shoot.

Oh, I'm sorry. Kids willingness to learn another language. Eighth grade is like the worst time to introduce that. If you've taught middle school, there's like a progression. Eighth grade, they think they know everything and they're just like too cool for school. And it's really hard to get them out there into that comfort zone, like like discomfort zone. Um, so I just feel like, oh my god, that's like I'm glad I don't have to do that. Um, okay. So, thank you very much and have a lovely evening. Thank you for all you do. Thank you, Sarah.

Hi, my name is Chantel Best and I have kids at Paddle Elementary and I also have a student that's a junior at high school and two students that went up through the middle school and high school. Um, I just want to quick comment on the tier three reduction. I know that's not recommended, but I feel like I need to advocate for pound a little bit. I'm sure I'm sad to hear everybody about their positions and budget cuts and I know it's not great anywhere but um what sticks out for me is the suggestion of possibly moving fifth grade panel to Mass Landing. I personally know all of the kid. Oh, I'm also a substitute teacher at PES. I do the after school program and I am the president of the PTA. So I met Pel a lot. Um the I know all the fifth graders personally and me picturing every single one of those 18 kids going to another school for just one year and leaving Panel their fifth grade year whether it's for their individual needs or because they're looking for their sibling coming into the class. We have other programs at Panel that other schools don't have, which I know we're very lucky to have those, but just see thinking about them missing out on all that stuff just seems like there's not a lot of pros to that. Um, and also just that tier has a lot of cuts in the RTI positions and panel alone got paused just this year, which is where the kids on behavioral plans get to utilize that.

And seeing the impact it has on even specific classrooms, them having that space for them to choose to go there or to get that one-on-one help or to be sent to that classroom.

um it makes a big academic difference and behavioral difference to all the other kids in that classroom.

So yeah, that's it. Thank you, Shantel. Thanks.

Private private reporting for duty.

Um, all the talk is social today. I just want to push out there if you're not aware, tomorrow evening, the eighth graders from Freeport Middle School and Dar Community School will all be presenting their National History Day projects um at Darham Community School starting at 6:30. For the last two years, it's been hosted down um here at Freeport Middle School. We're thrilled uh and grateful to FMS to make that transition up to DCS for the uh presentations tomorrow. And um the student work is great and so you'll get to see the theme if you're not familiar with the process is there's a broad theme and then students can choose within that theme uh topic that they want to then research and present about and uh the theme was revolution and there's a lot of really interesting interpretations about what garnered a revolution or what constituted revolution everything from um as one might imagine the American Revolution um which I claim is actually a civil war but that didn't go down great and uh all the way to the revolution in goalkeepers using gloves in soccer games. So there's a broad range and kids have done an amazing job. So if you'd like to get a boost of what actually goes on with some of the humanities and social studies work um 6:30 tomorrow. Thank you. Thank you.

All right. Anyone else?

Okay. Well, then I would uh take a motion to adjurnn. Cara and Steph. Thank you.

============================================================

RSU5 BOARD OF DIRECTORS MEETING TRANSCRIPT
Meeting Date: February 11, 2026
Source File: transcript_2026-02-11-FHS-Staff_oEzQ7M-L6zw.txt
District: Regional School Unit 5 (Freeport, Durham, Pownal, Maine)
============================================================

I wonder how necessary.

They might be necessary. There's a there's people pretty far back. Yours is lit. They might be here.

Mine is. [laughter] Oh, he's miked up.

Oh, yeah. Oh, turn it off when you're done. Otherwise, set up here today. And so we're really excited to welcome them.

I know that she wanted very quick reminder, 30 sophomores and 40 your all your advising.

Okay. So, welcome everybody.

You guys all know this year action steps. A lot of talk about it and these guys are really at the next level answering one or two of those questions that whichever one they want to answer.

And then after that it's open open to you guys to ask them any questions that you might have about this talk.

Um and so again thank you all so much for coming to thank you very much. So uh so let me introduce them and then we'll get to the questions. So first we have Dr.

Goodman who is from Southern Community College and he is the vice president and academic dean. And we have Kim Hilton right next to right next to it and she is uh the enrollment and retention counselor for the graduate studies.

You made fun of and you made fun of.

Awesome. And then uh Nicholas Ray who is the senior associate director of admissions at the University of Maine Florida.

Uh and then Victoria Ber from St. Joseph College who is the director of sorry director academic center for excellence.

Thank you so much and Dr. Tia from college. is the academic life coach, an associate director and associate director college, right?

Oh, the center for learning and teaching. Okay, good. And she's also And then we have Mormon.

All right. Awesome. Who is also And then over here who is the assistant director of online and transfer agreements. Yeah, transfer agreements.

Thank you guys again so much for coming up.

Thank you again. Does anybody want to start?

Let's see about the microphone. Can you hear me?

That's so official up front here. Um, so yeah, we were um to choose a question.

And one question that Chen sent us that really stood out to me was what what should high schools avoid in the exe executive functioning scaffolding? So I think no one has ever asked me what to avoid really. And I think I was thinking about this and I was wondering if maybe sometimes we're trying too hard like we're trying to structure everything for them, remind them constantly um to stick to deadlines or you know what just happened earlier is um like okay they have not signed up for their courses yet we need to remind them right. Um yeah yeah yeah so but I mean these these kind of things they happen at college level too but there are no reminders like the advisers are not knocking on their door constantly right there's a lot more responsibility required from students at the college level um but I took a few notes like what what are the things that um we could maybe avoid in high school um yeah overstructuring like if you remind them constantly um to get their homework in um chunk everything down for them to to the tiniest bit.

They will not learn how to do that on their own. So maybe sometimes they really need to miss an assignment and maybe receive a bad grade and realize, okay, there are consequences if I do not stick with my deadlines. Um don't chunk everything down for them. Say you have a a paper coming up next week. How do you want to approach it? So like coach them through the process. Help them to chunk it down. you know, do it with them in the beginning and then let them do it on their own. Um, and and sometimes, and I I think that happens at at a college level, too, we start helping them when they're already in crisis, right? They're like really in trouble, the house is on fire, and now we try to help them, but that's also a moment where it's hard for them to learn because they're stressed out, right? So, when we are stressed, it's hard to receive new information. and it's hard to to to really learn this new behavior.

So, approaching it before they're in crisis. Um, teach them step by step, you know, new strategies every month. It doesn't have to be all at once. And, um, I think you were just saying that earlier, like when do we stop uh, helping them? And I would say don't don't just stop like all at once. like really gradually step by step like take some support away until you realize they have really figured out that skill and then you can go a step further. So let them really develop those habits, strategies and skills um before you take more scaffolding away but at some point we we just need to do that like we need to take it away. Um I might add one more thing to this um because we were also asked for a scenario.

Um negative impact when executive function fell flat. Um so I'm currently working with a student who still heavily relies on their mother's support like still now she's in her second year. And we were talking about um something. Oh yeah. just a couple days ago, she's like, "Oh, I have all these deadlines. I have to apply for internships for study abroad." And it was some one other thing, and there's so many deadlines. I was like, "Let's put them in your calendar." So, she opened her planner, turned to the page where she wanted to put the date, and she said, "Oh, my mother already wrote that in here." I was like, "What? What?" And that just happened like over winter break. So, it's really hard for me to work with students as an academic life coach or executive functioning coach if there's still another adult doing it for them because I want to encourage the student. Now, you want to write it in there and then we're going to check, you know, like how can you stick with the deadline? I bet the mother is still like calling them every day and saying, you know, like in a week you have this deadline. Have you already started? But this is not really going to help this student become independent and this is the second year in college. you know, just thinking ahead grad school, we really need to help them be independent and sometimes we just have to learn like through a little like failures and consequences, you know, sometimes that's like a way of teaching too.

Okay. Hello.

Hi, that's probably better. Okay. Um, hi everybody. Uh, I'm gonna piggyback off of a lot of what you were mentioning.

Um, I'm our director at the academic center for excellence at St. Joe's. So, a lot of the work I'm doing is working with first year students specifically on their transition to college. I manage our first year experience programming, the curriculum, the instructors. Um, and I also meet with a lot of students who are struggling academically while also leading excellent student leaders who are high achieving. So I have a bit of a very broad spectrum um of students I'm either supporting or supervising. Um, I also work with faculty a lot. Faculty will come down to our office to consult with us of things that they're seeing in the classroom, things that are problems, things they're frustrated with. And what I can share um is that we're seeing that students are having a really really hard time with breaking a big assignment into several different pieces. I work with a lot of students who are like, "Oh yeah, it's due tomorrow. I'll do it tonight." No, you need to do it five days beforehand. Things don't um just happen once overnight. And I think students have a really hard time conceptualizing that. it takes them multiple days, multiple drafts to write an essay. It's not a oneanddone. Um, so I think if you all can help encourage them to break down larger assignments and plan out when they're going to do draft one, when they're going to revise it, when they're going to go to the writing center to have it reviewed, and then still leaving enough time for them to go ahead and do their final draft. Um, I'm we're also seeing that students are really relying heavily on Brightpace, which is our learning management system, to alert them when things are due. What I do with students when I see this happening is I have them print out all their syllabus.

We go through and I have them cross off and check off when that class is complete and what homework they need to do. So, I'm getting really down to the nitty-gritty with a lot of these students that are either on academic probation or academic warning um and are lacking some of those skills to plan out their week, even their day, even the next hour. some of them have a really hard time with um our really successful students um are students who have the ability to you know use a planner, use Google calendar, organize their assignments that are going to take a long time and work really well in a group with others. Um something that I think I would say if we could avoid it would be flexible deadlines. And I don't really know where we're at with that at the high school level since co, but many of our students um that struggle think, "Oh, my professor will just take the late work. No biggie." No big deal.

[laughter] And um there's a there's a lack of urgency from some students when they miss a deadline. It's, "Oh yeah, I'll just I'll turn it in." But they need to understand that that's not how it's going to be in a lot of college, you know, a lot of college courses. Some faculty are more flexible than others, but there are some faculty that are very strict and have a no late work policy and students get really tripped up on that. Um, so just reviewing my notes that I have here, I think if what I can promote for you all is really really working hard with them on how to be um, self- advocates for themselves and really pioneer putting their own schedules together, breaking down major assignments and eliminating flexible deadlines because it's it's creating a very large challenge um, and a lot of frustration for our faculty um, at the college level at least at St. Joe's. I can't of course speak across all colleges. Yeah, I probably Uain Farmington as well. So, um yeah, hopefully hopefully that helps and happy to answer any other questions the folks may have afterwards.

Hi there. Um so I'll be for right up front. I don't work with undergrads anymore. I used to um but now I work with graduate students who are mostly teachers getting their master's degrees but I know all the faculty so I sent these questions to my faculty friends and said what are you seeing with your first and second years and so I took notes so we've got like the experts here so um one thing that I heard from four different people is that students tend to be reacting to assignments rather than being proactive about getting them done. They're relying on Brightpace.

They're relying on, you know, getting an alert in their Brightpace app that, oh, such and such is due. And in many cases, if they only pay attention to what's in Brightpace, they're missing really important stuff.

Um, and same thing like, oh, my paper is due tomorrow. I got an alert. I better do it. They're not having that time to do a first draft. They're not having that time to, you know, really make sure they're turning in their best work. And we're seeing a lot of students turning in work that they know is crummy, figuring in turning something in is better than nothing, hoping that they'll get a second chance. And there aren't a lot of second chances. And the few faculty who do let them redo an assignment, they're usually only can gain like half the amount of missing points or something along those lines.

So turning in something that's really crummy and then expecting that, oh, I'll just do it again later and turn it in for an A isn't what's going to happen.

Um, and I think for a lot of students, it's the lack of planning. It's the lack of being able to break up an assignment into smaller pieces. It's not knowing what resources are available to them.

Um, and so through our first year seminars, through our academic success centers and whatnot, we try to, you know, help students with that. But students don't know what they don't know. And so if they don't know that those resources are available or they don't know that they should even be thinking about writing a paper more than a day in advance, that's really hard.

Um, and the other big thing we're really seeing with our students is, and maybe it's the taste of freedom and being able to, you know, they're waking up in their dorm versus waking up at home where mom's going to pester them to go to school. They've got to go to class. We have so many students that they're like, "Oh, well, everything's on Brightpace.

it's okay that I miss class and it's not. And those are the same students who are missing, you know, addendums to assignments. They're missing important instructions and then they're doing poorly on their work because they're missing the instructive time. Um, and so for a lot of students, it then snowballs. They miss one class and then they're like, "Oh, shoot. Well, I don't want to have to face my professor and talk to them about why I missed class because really I just overslept and I didn't really want to go." and then they skip another class and then the next thing you know a student has missed. We have one student out of 27 classes of a semester they missed 10 and there was no way that they could pass because attendance was mandatory and that student it was too late to withdraw and they ended up getting a really bad grade because they weren't there and they didn't get half the instruction. And so all the assignments that they attempted to turn in weren't actually meeting any of the requirements all because you know early on they're like, "Oh, I I can skip this one." And unless you've got the plague or something really big going on that means you can't be there, you should be there. And I think for a lot of students, they're like, "Oh, well, you know, it's okay." Well, yeah, they've got eight adults who will see you very the very next day when you go and tell you what you missed. whereas, you know, you miss a day in college, your professor is may not even notice.

Um, and they're certainly not going to remember to tell you after the next class why you missed the previous class, especially if it's a once a week class.

You know, they're not going to remember who was there the previous Wednesday.

So, that's another big thing is they've got to go to class.

I've worked in admissions now for 23 years and and worked very closely with faculty as well and and some of our biggest hurdles that we're seeing at the University of Maine specifically in talking is the communication aspect. Um, email is still our main way of communicating. You know, we we have Brightpace and we have other uh LMS platforms, but the key of reading and responding need to emails is a real challenge and struggle for our students.

Um, we're getting to the point now that we're advising students to keep their college email as just their college email. Do not attach that to any promotions to any outside vendors so that when you get an email from us, you're seeing it and reading it. And then the other structure problem that we're facing and major challenges is adapting to a professional style email and a professional style conversation within that email. And I'm talking the very basics from an initial subject line to a proper greeting to a salutation.

Everything about the email. Um and and that's a struggle. Um and unfortunately it's not just a struggle for our students. It's I'm going in the process of interviewing candidates for a position and I'm finding that struggle as well uh in the workforce. Um but this is one major component when we we're talking about the building the communication that email is often times students aren't reading it. they're not getting the updates that they should get about their classes or changes in classes as well. Um, they're not proofreading it either. They just start writing. Um, you know, my challenge in the admissions world is sometimes students will send me an email and never even put their name in the email and then I'm trying to search their email address to find them in my system to hopefully tie it to an a record, you know. Um, so that those challenges are are starting in the admissions process, but we're having to coach and really teach the students the the professional communication you should be having to to monitor your email. We're encouraging students, make sure you're adding it to your phone. I know this is all basic stuff that we all take for granted that we do in our professional lives a lot of times, but we're trying to establish this in the college level because it's going to translate also to the workforce uh when they enter the workforce. Um, and then even the basis of of giving us a concise question, a basic question structure, uh, of what they really need.

You know, sometimes it's language that they're familiar with, but isn't correlated to the faculty member or staff member that they're working with.

Um, so I we really do stress that the communication part is one that, you know, whether it's with our students, our staff, or our alumni, of that email component isn't going away. uh as much as they love to text and communicate via text, we do have some faculty that of course communicate via text, but email is still the major component. Um, and it's almost like going back, I'm thinking back to my college and high school years, that business communications class that taught you how to draft a letter. we almost are having to go back to how do you draft an email and start an email or a professional question that you're asking to your advisor to set up a meeting um is really something we're seeing at UI and our faculty are seeing firsthand and trying to coach them in that first year seminar courses but also we've had to build in multiple layers of support for many years it was just a faculty member that the student was connecting with well now all of our colleges are building academic advisors so we're actually creating tier approaches. We have your academic adviserss that students can go to any time of the day. These are professionals that aren't necessarily teaching classes, your faculty adviserss. We're trying to create layers so that we can have students more comfortable in the communication aspect and coming to um them because we find students are more than willing uh if they like something, they're going to seek it out. But oftentimes we're finding we're having to push students along um in and saying kind of get out of that comfort zone and and utilize these services, you know, utilize the writing center and the math tutor lab and the center for academic support. And they almost need that nudge. They they don't have that confidence to kind of seek those resources out. And there's more resources than they could probably ever take advantage of. Um, but it's a matter of if they don't have us giving them the support of yes, this is what it is. Please take advantage of it. They're not seeking out or advocating for themselves on it.

I'm still trying to envision my mother writing in my planner. It was like that would not have happened in the Goodman home. Um, ditto.

everything you heard and I'm sitting here chuckling because it it's it is so similar. I mean when you when you go to national conferences of you know collection of higher education you whether it's a two-year college, four-year college, undergrad, grad school, everybody's experiencing the same thing, right? So uh we we're sitting here taking great solace in in knowing that okay it's not just us it's not just our students. Um it is remarkable. Well, it doesn't matter how a student performed in high school, whether they were a high-f flyier, validictorian, or, you know, really struggled throughout high school. The that not doing work or not doing it on time. I'm I'm blown away by how prevalent that is to the point where we're experiencing a phenomenon now in our classes and my my colleagues we were just faculty colleagues are just like racking their like just looking at each other like what is happening students are actually showing up not missing a class not doing a thing not a thing even engaged in the class but you didn't you didn't do that discussion board how about that paper that is half the Agreed. No.

And and there's there's no real response, right? It's like there there isn't a singular this is why I didn't do that. Um and so honestly, it comes down to that that tough piece of they failed the course. And sometimes that's the wakeup call, right? And and it also has to be a conversation with the student because we don't want them to go to that fixed mindset. And that's what we're seeing. A lot of things are stemming from that fixed mindset. Well, I'm not smart enough. I'm not good enough. I wasn't supposed to be here. See, I was I was right or all those people were right saying that, you know, I college wasn't for me.

That that becomes a you know, they they really truly start believing that, right? But if we can exercise that growth mindset of fall a number of times, but it's the getting up that matters, right? And it's you try something once, it doesn't work, so you just give up. No. So I think our first year experience course and and really our our approach to that first semester uh and really through the throughout the entire first year I is is been working towards that growth mindset and helping students develop that growth mindset.

Um, and you have students that are experiencing, you know, like never before, anxiety. We we hear it all the time. And whether that's officially diagnosed or not diagnosed, students are are are really open about talking about their anxiety, which is wonderful.

In in the same conversations, you're finding out that students are doing the paper at the last minute and they're telling you that they're anxious. Well, what makes you anxious?

And then you, well, maybe if we weren't working on that in the last second, it's not the best product, right? It it it needs to go through the writing is a process. You need to have a series of revisions. You're not giving your best work and you're also making yourself sick at the same time. So that time management piece, you know, time management, growth mindset has really become like if this if those are the only two things we focused on in first year, perfect. Um, but that's something that is is is prevalent. I've seen it really compounded, I think, over the last five years. I think usually what that would have taken maybe a decade and it's almost like we've had 15 years of this happen o seemingly overnight. Um and it does again it doesn't matter what kind of a performer they were in high school. Doesn't matter how great of a high school they went to. We're seeing it across the board.

Um, for vocab sake, I want to clarify what a counseling center is for us at a college level because I think sometimes when we have first year students that come to the college, they think guidance counselor. And so, I want to clarify that. I work I'm a licensed clinical social worker and I work at the counseling center at St. Joe's and we provide one-on-one therapy for students.

We provide couples counseling, crisis intervention, that kind of mental health support. And so I just wanted to clarify the lens from which I'm coming. And as I listen to everyone, you topped it off at the end. Like I think underlying a lot of this is anxiety. Um before I get into my bit, I want to thank y'all for coming at the end of a day. And I can imagine as I was listening to people, I was starting to feel anxious like what should they do? What should we do? What should they not do? And it's just like some of them contradicted each other. And I could imagine y'all are like, "Amen. I have that mom calling me too." and as well as a little bit like these are my chickities and I'm doing the best that I can so don't tell me what not to do. I'm doing the best that I can and I have the luxury of working one-on-one students but I could imagine if you're in front of 30 students with 30 different needs, how do you meet them all at once? And so some of our settings we're working one-on-one with people and then you can come in on what executive functioning skill they need work on. Um, so when I got this assignment, the first thing I did was Google executive functioning skills because I kind of knew what they were, but then I drilled it down on high school. And so I chose the ones that I thought was most important. And then I realized that's because those are the ones that I'm most comfortable with. And I chose the ones I thought was important, the ones that I'm comfortable with. That doesn't mean the person across from me needs to work on those. And so adjusting for what that particular student needs and then from 9th grade to 12th grade, holy cow, what they need is so different, never mind jumping into college. So no surprise, the two I chose are emotional control and cognitive flexibility.

And I feel like the the threat level that is what they call anxiety is so high that all of this other stuff feels once it until we're regulated, how can we do some of these other things? And so I think all those things go in tandem.

But to spend time working on one thing with one student that doesn't apply to them, it's just I can imagine how hard it is for y'all to choose an executive function for a group that might have different challenges. For me, it's also checking in on my So, the the term I would use is distress tolerance, right? To accept some to to expect a student not to be anxious about something that's unrealistic. So, how do we start talking about tolerating the distress? So, we have a paper coming, we are absolutely frozen about it. And so, we feel anxious, we avoid, we go hang out with our friends because we also have FOMO. And so, we're going to go be with them instead. and that feels better and now I'm regulated but I still haven't worked on my paper and so each time we avoid something it gets harder and harder to do it. So how do we keep them in the fight even just a little bit longer? And so that would kind of be my angle about working around emotional control. How can you tolerate the distress for even a little bit? And if I could, I'd also call that mom and I'd call the professors and even call myself out because sometimes giving in to their distress brings all of us relief rather than having them tow the line and even I can fall for it. So we get people that are like, I can't tolerate my roommate.

She's doing this. She's doing that. Have y'all had a conversation about it? No.

And then you can't even get them to talk to each other. So all of a sudden I feel myself wanting to reach out to res life.

Can we move their room? because it makes my work with this student easier because they're so stuck on that. So I even fall for it and I think our par the parents fall for it and I think professors are like sure I'll give you an extension because it's e easier to give you the extension than to hold the boundary with you. So I guess part my long- winded answer is yes. All these executive functions are important and it's person by person developmental ninth grade versus a senior in college. That's part of why I like the work that I like because the student I get their first year of college and the student that I'm seeing senior year, it's like I was a miracle worker but just growing up, just developing has brought new skills to their life. So to apply some of this learning appropriately to who's in front of you, their age, their developmental level, and then to just check yourself, too. I think that's a lot because if someone came to me about time management, I think I'd freak out a little bit because I do well with time management, but I couldn't tell you what I do to do well with it. And so for us to choose what we're good at and and turn to people that are better at the other ones, I guess that's just my two cents.

Well, thank you guys.

[applause] Appreciate it.

So now question No, it is not a disservice.

Um I will it is very common for us to hear from uh from students in the very first semester. Can we can we just use Google Classroom because that's what we used in high school. I mean, we're basically higher ed's basically down to what four LMS's now because they keep merging. The companies keep buying one another. Um, it is I'm I'm thrilled to hear my colleagues giving examples of students uh that are actively engaged with Brightpace. I wish that were the case across the board. Um, but it is an incredible tool um to facilitate learning. I mean, the idea that you can constantly revisit material as opposed to you're you're listening to a lecture and and boy, I wish I would have caught all of that. I wish I would have written that down. I wish I could have recorded that. And and it's allowing learning to continue even after the bell rings, the course is the the class meeting is over. So I I would say don't discontinue it. I don't I don't see that piece at all. Yeah.

Yeah. Yeah.

That's a when you figure that out, could you call me and let me know, please? But you know there there is I mean part of it is helping them understand that I think one of the toughest transitions I see for students and like we how do you do college right how do you do college and it's jarring to students to know that oh this is me like professors aren't calling me to check in on me if I don't hear from professors I guess I'm just doing great it's like no Jimmy you got an F right but I didn't I haven't heard anything like I I'll surely I'll hear if I'm doing poorly and and that can be pretty jarring for folks, right? They're just not accustomed to it. Um so there is as much as you can do whether it's you know scaffolding assignments ensuring that the students are you know that it's not just mom and dad checking grades that the students know where they where they are um on you know whether it's on certain assignments or projects. But really building towards that ownership piece that allows for the self- advocacy that that that we're all talking about.

And to jump in there, I think the transition between high school and college, um, I was a public school teacher for a really long time, loved Google Classroom. I could very easily be like, okay, I was an English teacher, you know, your, you know, brainstorm is due this day. I need your first draft this day. The and I could I could chunk it for them the whole thing. Put all the dates on Google Classroom.

Professors use Brightpace. They use the LMS, but they don't do that part. They essentially say, "This is your assignment. This is the due date." They post it like three weeks ahead of time.

And you know, the students don't get an alert about it. They don't get reminders about it. It's there, but they need to take that that step to be like, "Okay, I've got a paper due in three weeks. How am I going to look ahead three weeks from now? What do I need to do step by step to get there?" And, you know, maybe that's, you know, the beginning of the year with Google Classroom. you do scaffold everything for them, but then you know maybe one of the assignments towards the end of the year you'll be like, "Okay, we've got a big paper due in three weeks. What do you think you need to do now knowing it's due in three weeks?" And just some of those little pieces of, you know, hey, you're a senior in whatever adventure you're going off to next year. You know, your teachers, your professors, your employers, they're going to give you a task, but they're not going to tell you how to do the task. So, you've got to figure that out. And so I think I work with graduate students now and I'm an academic adviser for graduate students and I still have some of those students who are contacting me especially if they've never done an online class before because most of the grad classes are online. They're like I don't know how to manage my time to do any of this.

And I think it's something all of us kind of need to learn especially if it's something asynchronous. Um, but also, you know, when you go from high school where you've got adults, you know, on every corner telling you what to do to being in college where you're pretty much figuring it on your on your own, I think that's a real big challenge. And so, I think maybe just some of those little skills, you know, yeah, scaffold the heck out of it for them because they need to learn how to do it, but then maybe as they get older, less scaffolding and maybe they have to figure it out on their own. But the due date doesn't they don't get an extension just because they didn't figure it out.

faculty different.

So I might have like a small idea.

[laughter] [gasps] Um so I know that it totally varies at our college um if that's allowed or not.

Um, and for some classes where I've seen it happen is more like skill b skill-based classes like in the arts or a drawing you know they let you maybe like work on it again after you get feedback or in writing classes in a first year writing seminar um they bring in a first draft get feedback and then can redo it. So these things definitely happen but not for all classes like like for science classes like for a math final there's usually no retake for those kind of things there it's really expected that you study until you master the material and then you take the test that's I think generally the expectation at college um but for these like skillbased or soft skill like a softer skills classes I think um retakes definitely happen. Um, sometimes they might subtract a point or two. Um, but they would let you do it. I mean, so I I feel like there's no yes or no answer. I think it really depends on the subject, on the learning goals, on what you expect from your students for a certain class and maybe at a certain age, right?

Um, I really liked what what you were saying about this is all developmentally. Um, like the prefrontal cortex still develops until like 25 years old, right? So there is still a lot of growth happening and we don't expect like a ninth grader or even like a senior in high school to come to college and know it all and have them have all the executive function skills mastered. but having heard of a planner or seen a calendar before or having seen you scaffold um a project break down bigger things develop milestones having heard of this that can definitely help for them to pick it up up a little faster. Um and what you were saying um just earlier like there there is no support right I feel like we still do have support for students and that's again what you I feel like all of you have said things I wanted to like I kept taking notes I want to like come and not all of your comments um that they don't know about the support or you have to push them there you have to walk them into into the centers show them the support structures I think many times it's stigma too like Okay. Like when I'm asking questions, I'm seeking out support. That means I'm not what you said made for college. I'm trying picking up everything you guys said like um you know like teaching them or making them comfortable like asking questions, asking for help um to take some of that stigma away and tell them even in college it's okay to ask for help. The resources they have are there for a reason. like we are, you know, like we have so many people on campus there just to support students and sometimes we sit there and we have like an open calendar for half a day. Um it's like okay and some students like even seniors don't know that we are there to help them. Um so sometimes it's not knowing about resources or being being afraid um or scared you know like to ask for help. So that's another thing I think you could like definitely tell them like when you're in college go use the resources ask for help. There is still support. You're not completely on your own generally.

Yeah.

I'm going to jump in on that one. First I want to acknowledge the question about reassessing. And I when I meet with students about this it seems like and I'm sure y'all wrestle with this all the time. It's grading assessing but then there's also learning. And sometimes those two things are at odds. And so if the reassessing could be not to get a different grade, but to make sure you know the material for the next thing.

And so that's some of the things that we work with on for students to go back like I got a bad grade and the professor won't let me retake it. Well, yeah, but you can loop back and try see the test, see what you got wrong, so you can relearn the things. And so that's one difference which I'm sure you'll wrestle with all the time. as far as I think when you spoke you mentioned all the resources on campus and so I think it's a different version of what y'all probably do readily all the supports are there but now it's on them to find them um and I will normalize that they don't right away because it's typically especially at a residential college first time out of the house on your own I am the master of my destiny I don't need anyone that is natural. They're individuating.

I don't want to go get help. I don't need help. Um, one of the best things that happened is rather than all of the people with big titles saying go get resources, it's when the peers say it.

And so I was at a first year event and it was just more of a social event and some seniors walked by and so I knew them. I stopped them. I'm like, I'm here with a bunch of first year students. You guys, what advice would you have for them? and they said get resources earlier rather than later. And I think them stopping and saying that probably had a way more impact than me standing there and telling them that. So I don't know how that coaches how that informs y'all for coaching them except for if you have people going to college. Find an older teammate. Find a big brother type person and ask them what their advice is because they're more likely to listen to their peers than they are to listen to us telling them what's best for them.

for I would in my experience reassessments are typically uh majority used for low stakes grading. So if if we're talking about the weight of of of a course grade, that's when I see most commonly faculty utilizing reassessments um just to ensure that the learning is happening. Right? We have plenty of uh departments that their their mantra is I just want them to get it right. Let's forget about the grade for a second.

Like I just need you to understand these concepts. Um so that's typically how I see those used.

One thing that I've encountered a lot with students who are seeking reassessment um is that they haven't read the syllabus.

So, they don't know what their professor is going to require. Um, so like the top three things that I would tell any college kid is read the syllabus and go to class and try to figure out how to manage your time. Um, but reading the syllabus is huge because the professor, I don't know how it is in other places, but they have to outline what their grading procedures are. And so those students who've never read it, I had one faculty member who's like put in her syllabus that the lowest grade that they got they would be allowed to do a reassessment on. No one turned up to do any reassessments because they hadn't read the syllabus to know it was an option. and she's like, "I don't know why this kid who got like a D minus on something didn't actually come to me about bringing up the grade and because they didn't even know it was there." So, I think for a lot of students, they just assume college is an extension of high school and it's not. Um, and they don't think to read the syllabus to know what the policies are because it can vary from person to person, from department to department. Um, so if I can give any advice to anyone telling talking to kids going to college, tell them to read the syllabus. It's really important. And then come to the counseling center.

Yes. Because the first week of every semester, even for seniors, they come in, oh my god. And I'm like, you just read the syllabus. Everything is not due right now. So they're reading them and then just really getting stressed out.

So there's dates and it goes throughout the semester. So read it and take a deep breath. put them in your planner.

Read the syllabus. Put the dates in your planner.

One thing that I I don't think we mentioned, um, we always tie procrastination sometimes around paperwork, you know, writing a a term paper, but procrastination really it's the stem and problem of the time management as a whole. But I think the first time thinking back and reflecting, um, I failed my first college exam ever.

Okay? Never had failed an exam in high school whatsoever. It was a sink or swim moment as a first generation student.

What am I going to do? Well, failure wasn't an option because I knew if if I failed my father, it wasn't it wasn't going to be good for me at home. But that being said, it it made me seek out resources of upper classmen. You know, how did you get through this class? This class wasn't what I I'm not used to studying in that sense. And I was a high school student that procrastinated that only studied the night before an exam.

Well, college I had to reprogram myself of I now have to study for an exam two or three days out and that was a totally new function that I never realized as a high school student. But getting to college, that's what I had to do to be successful. There was no starting my studying at 10:00 at night, getting the two or three hours in, and then waking up an hour early and trying to cram one more hour before the class started. It was now having to re-evaluate my procrastination not just from writing a paper but to studying for an exam and that realizing the high stakes of an exam on the syllabus as well. You know, thankfully there was a professor in a couple of my college classes that may drop the lower exam, you know, if depending on how you performed, but that wasn't always the case depending on the class. But realizing that college as a whole, the the big circle of learning, the time investment in it, you know, we we spent 30 hours a week probably in classroom in high school setting. Well, you're only 15 hours a week in a college setting in class. So all that additional time and being able to manage class, prioritizing the studying, resting, you know, getting that refresh as well as a bigger picture of almost like a job aspect of managing the day so that come Friday, if that exams on Friday, I've already started this process on Monday or Tuesday. Uh and it's something that we we take for granted. Um but some of us that's necessary for us to be successful as well. And I don't think we start that in high school. We don't start thinking about studying for our test at the beginning of the week and starting to implement those strategies. Sometimes we we all do it. We all wait till the night before or the morning of.

I can chime in as well. Um Nick, you made me think of something when you said jobs. Um, honestly, the way I approach how I teach first year experience and how I work with students when they have scheduled meetings with me to talk about academic success or time management, um, too many of them don't show up. Too many of them show up late. Too many of them don't turn their work in. And I I am very frank with them, supportive, but frank. And I'm like, "What if I was your boss and you didn't come to my meeting that we scheduled?" And they're always like, "You'd probably fire me." And I'm like, "Yeah, I probably would." So this is this is your mulligan. We're going to try again, but you need to show up. And I think for you all too, you know, we not all students are going to be going to college. Some are going to go right into the workforce. So thinking of how are we preparing them even at the high school level for jobs?

Um setting that example to them. You know, when you're emailing me like you're texting me, which I get so much.

um I have to tell them like what if you emailed your boss like that? So it's just it's starting to really talk about um work jobs being accountable in speaking professionally earlier I think would be really really helpful. Um I want to make sure that we answered your question as well about reassessment. Do you feel like we got to it? Yeah. Okay.

Okay.

I mean I guess one of the I teach allowance.

I think it's it's a bit of you want to challenge and support them.

And I think I like your idea of starting out with at the beginning. We're going to give a little bit more leeway and hold off on that leeway the older they get. Um, I would be cautious about how many times they can reassess and how what that reassessment looks like and how they can earn points with that reassessment. Um, I I've heard it from a lot of students that um they didn't study in high school. They've never studied before. And it's mind-blowing to me because I studied like crazy in high school. Um, but I I I don't know if some folks who are sharing that in their high school experience didn't have intense or rigorous examinations or essays or something that really did raise the bar and raise the stakes for them. So, it feels a little jarring when they get to college and they're a bio major and they failed, you know, one of their two exams that they have for the entire semester.

Um, so I do think reassessments are okay, but with restrictions and with limits and perhaps you get one a semester. You get that one time to make things up. um because we don't want to hold their hand, but we also have to be practicing being kind and compassionate because we know there's a lot going on in these teenagers lives and these young adults lives that do really impede on their ability to learn to focus. Um, so that's kind of what I do, especially in my first year experience classes, is I give them that one that one redo with a little bit of a stern but friendly talk and then you it actually works out pretty well. And I work with all of our students too that fail first year experience. So it's like you're with me again. [laughter] Um, and it's it's it's good. So I hope that helps. our director of student accessibility services wrote to me and said if you get the opportunity where you're asked is there anything that schools should stop doing she literally wrote stop granting reassessments so if you speak to Heather Jackson please let her know that I did convey that fact to you know of the four faculty that responded to my email four of them said the same thing um that the infinite um use of redoss um along with the acceptance of late work. Um the faculty that I've talked to who do allow reassessment, usually there's a lot of hoops to jump through um and even looking back over 25 years ago when I was in college, one of my professors would allow reassessments um for his math class. Um he was one of the professors that he always assigned homework, but he didn't really check it.

Um if you wanted to reassess, you had to show him every speck of homework from the entire semester and then he'd let you reassess. Um, and so learned pretty quickly that gosh, I should probably be doing this homework because if I don't understand it, if I show him I was trying, he'll at least let me try again.

Um, and I think with a lot of faculty, I think they have if they do allow reassessments, it's under that type of um, structure that yeah, you can try again, but you need to show me that you tried the first time. You know, it's one thing to fail because you didn't understand. It's another thing to fail because you didn't try.

I'm from a lot of what we talked about today.

in the online world.

And so I right now in terms of reassessing and A lot of times what happens is we really try to put our students into what we consider your first year experience whatot and we are finding that those students are struggling for everything.

So I definitely encourage you know to find out is that oh this struggle in the online we do offer just as many resources and whatnot just as well as the campus but they still have a lot more of their So we are seeing a little bit of that struggle as well.

All right. Well, we have sadly reached our time here today, but I want to thank you guys one more time. [applause] record for our purposes. So, you know, if you want to like follow up again, thank you so much for coming down. Thank you for your time. Thank you guys. Everybody have a great afternoon and we'll see you guys tomorrow and hopefully you guys come visit the and St. shows tables.

============================================================

RSU5 BOARD OF DIRECTORS MEETING TRANSCRIPT
Meeting Date: February 11, 2026
Source File: transcript_2026-02-11_Wzpb70M9aig.txt
District: Regional School Unit 5 (Freeport, Durham, Pownal, Maine)
============================================================

That's what You're going to tell me when we're good, Sam. Right. Okay.

See, this is where all the administrators sit in the back. And I feel like if all of your kids sat in the back, you would make them all come up to the front. So, just saying.

Good evening. Welcome to the RSU5 board of directors. It is Wednesday, February 11th, 2026. We are here at the Freeport High School Library. We have a full board, including our newest member, Lois uh Kilby Chzn Chesley. Sorry, I will get that right.

Um she was appointed last night uh by the town uh the select board and quickly got herself sworn in so she could join us this evening. Thank you so much for that. Um all right, we will get started with the pledge of allegiance.

Okay. Uh, so we're going to move on to the minutes. So, uh, do I have a motion for consideration and approval of the minutes from the January 28th, 2026 meeting as presented, barring any errors or omissions? Valerie and Chris. Thank you. All those in favor?

Opposed? No. Okay.

Um I Oh, and for those that were watching last time and I said I didn't know why we didn't have minutes and it it was because when we have these uh meetings week to week, there's not enough time to get the minutes done by the time the package goes out the next morning. So, thank you Jenny um for informing me. Uh adjustments to the agenda? No. Oh, can you ask something to the agenda? No.

You can talk to me beforehand if we want to try to add something to the agenda.

Um well, now I'm curious. Okay. Uh I will bring it up.

Okay, perfect. I was I'm sure you can find a way to work in it. Um so, uh item six, good news and recognition. Uh, so are we having are you doing just are are you doing an actual update and then the strategic plan or you just doing them together? There's nothing really for me to update.

Okay. About student stuff. So, I'm just going to do the slides if that's fine.

Perfect. Yeah. Okay. So, our uh report from the the board student rep is actually a report out on the strategic plans portrait of a graduate belief statements and mission. and Maria, Kelly, and Cara are It's really just Maria. Okay, wonderful.

That's I'm fine. Thank you. Okay. So, this is the strategic planning committee update.

So, just a rundown of the committee. We have faculty, community, school board, students, and leadership.

And what you're looking at here is the timeline. So, January and February of 2025, it was laying out the foundation and develing the timeline.

Then you have seeking community input which was March and October of 2025.

Drafting the portrait was September and November which was the time that I had joined the committee. And then we are finally in strategic planning.

So then we have the community input.

So questions one and two are the hopes and dreams which were made to develop the structure of of graduate and then questions three and four which which was what we're doing well and what we need to be working on which was developing for the strategic plan and there were surveys and focus groups for all those um so I'm just going to share some of the data from the um the first round of feedback. My name is Erica Walstrom. I work at Great Schools Partnership um and started last January working with the committee and the to help facilitate these conversations.

So, what we have um is just some information about the survey and really what I think this data shows primarily is how it represents um the community and the different schools um that are being serviced in this district. So, we as Maria mentioned we had a survey there were 842 responses. The majority of those responses were from students um in part because we um gave the surveys to all middle school and high school students and sort of um a captive audience. Um they had an opportunity to fill them out. Um and so the rest of the surveys were parents, community members, um educators. The educators also participated in focus groups. Um so I think that represents a little bit of the the smaller number. They'd already provided their feedback in focus groups.

Um alumni and administrators people check multiple roles. So for an example, a parent might also check themselves as a community member as well. So you can see numbers kind of duplicating.

So these demographic um graphs that I'm going to be showing, we took the student body out um because we knew that that represented a cross-section of the schools because we had surveyed all of the students in um sixth through 12th grade. So, these demographics represent um the adult community, families, all of that group just to see if we had gotten a cross-section of the communities through various demographics. And I'm not going to go into too much detail.

And again, it's just to stress that the survey and the focus groups really did a nice job of getting a distribution across the community. So, this was based on the different roles. Again, I mentioned educators were a part of the focus groups. So, um that's why that number is a little bit lower.

This is based on schools. So, I've put the blue box um overlaying and that's the the enrollment um and the statistics based on um student uh data. So you can kind of do a comparison and see that the all of the schools were represented in the surveys.

All of the three communities were represented. Um the other might be alumni or family members that are in different communities.

This is the different programs. Only parents filled out this question. So if they answered that I am a parent then it would move them into this demographic.

So is your child in one of these programs um and has nice correlation with um with the actual student demographics.

This one is um the racial distribution.

And so you might notice that um the white population seems higher. I'll just point out that the demographics that I've listed in the blue box is our student body, not your community body.

And so there is actual more diversity in um the student body than there is in the community. We did like a little run and it was about 92% white um for the community at large. So that actually is a closer alignment than it appears at first.

Still could have been better, but um pretty closely aligned.

demographics. Uh we use a proxy question of um how worried are you about f food security. So in some ways um the economical disadvantage category might actually be a little bit more stringent might have capture a few more than how people might have answered this question. But again this one is a little bit lower than we might have hoped for.

We also ran a series of focus groups um one at each of the different um communities um the different schools as well as the library on the weekend and we also offered a virtual one. So 72 community members participated in these various focus groups. Those were in person. They were conversations. They lasted about an hour each uh for each of them.

And then this was drafting the portrait and the supporting documents.

So for this we used feedback from questions one and two and then surveys and focus groups.

So these are our pillars. So we had these shared out to the community. So they were intellectual curiosity, interpersonal competence, personal growth, community and global engagement, future readiness.

So for this um this was kind of the second round of feedback that we got. And at the bottom right of the screen, you can see that if there was a two plus, you can it people thought that it fully reflected what the portrait of what their vision was for the portrait of graduate. Um, and if you look, the majority of the numbers are quite high. So 1.71 1.61.

Um, so this is kind of another way of looking at that same data. Um the difference with this one is it shows um each of the different uh stakeholder groups and how they responded. And again what these graphs really show is how aligned people are in the community and about how positive they feel about the portrait that was initially drafted by um the strategic plan committee planning committee um based on the feedback. I'll just point out that this graph um the x axis it stops at 08. And so if it was the full uh line, what would happen is those uh y's and diamonds and triangles would be so tightly bound, you wouldn't be able to see them. So I just point that out to show that it actually looks more spread out than it actually is.

So then this was our portrait of a graduate and we took feedback from the data and made tweaks to make these statements stronger. Um I'm not going to read all of these but you do have a copy of the portrait of a graduate in your packets. Um and these also have two rounds of feedback for in them. So personal growth, community and global engagement, future readiness.

And then this was a visual the visuals and we kind of wanted to represent the natural features of our community, the ocean, the pine trees, things like that.

This is the mission statement. It is to empower and equip every learner with skills, curiosity, character, and purpose to thrive and live fulfilling lives in an everchanging world.

So then the we believe statements was my first meeting for the strategic plan that I went to um used responses from questions three and four to come up with these statements and these are sort of about what all members of the planning committee really viewed as the belief statements. So we had me and Ren who are the student representatives for this committee kind of be very involved in making these because they do affect students directly.

Um and yet again use data and feedback for these.

So that's where we are uh as of today and I feel like a huge amount of work from the planning committee, the strategic planning committee, um the community for sharing their um perspectives. And so now we take all of that feedback and all of that work and move forward into the strategic plan. Um the strategic plan is really the like how are you going to accomplish these visions that you have. So your portrait, your mission, your belief statements.

These are those lofty like things that you're um striving towards. And the strategic plan says, okay, how are we going to do that? What are our objectives? What do we want our outcomes to be? And how are we going to know that we're achieving them and when we're achieving them? So monitoring kind of that progress. Um so the committee is going to be breaking up uh sounds so harsh, but we're going to be in little subcommittees um working on the different belief statements. So each belief statement becomes um one of the objectives in the strategic plan. As it as we flesh it out, we might combine some together if it makes sense. But that's kind of our starting point. Um and they'll be putting together um in these smaller groups the language for the objectives, the outcomes, the progress monitoring, and then coming back together as a full group um tuning it, getting feedback from one another um in order to kind of come up with that final plan which we plan to present in June.

Again, just to reiterate what Maria already said, um question one and two were really at the heart of building your portrait of a graduate. Questions three and four, which is what are we doing really well as a district and where are our areas of growth that we want to lean into, that's the pieces of feedback that we're really going to be using to develop our strategic plan and to be thinking about. In addition to that, we're going to be looking at various sets of data. Um the faculty back in October already looked at attendance, graduation, NEIA, um the main integrated youth health survey. So kind of thinking about all of the the data that's out there that we know about the student body um and incorporating that into the plan. And then lastly, um faculty also looked at various white papers, research articles that were saying like what do we think young people moving into the future are going to need? what are the skills, the the the knowledge that they're going to need to be successful as graduates moving into the future. So, looking at that as well, I just wanted to share these are um the the top themes from questions three and four. So, again, question three, what are we doing really well as a district already? Um so you can see self-management, empathy, perspective taking, emotional regulation, um lots of great clubs and interest groups, critical thinking and problem solving, and a really inclusive welcoming school climate. So a culture and climate. So those are the things that from the feedback from the survey and the focus groups, those are the things that are standing out as real strengths for this district. Um the themes from question four, so what could we do better to prepare our students? Where is our growth edge? Um, emotional intelligence and community communication skills, character development, positive school climate and culture, which is interesting because you can see how things don't always great, but um, we can parse that out. Holistic student well-being, financial and p practical life skills, fostering student agency, field-based and community b community experiential learning, and curriculum relevance and streamlining.

So just to pull the screen back uh the curtain back a little bit on how the committee is going to be working. As I said, we'll divide up into subcommittees. Each one will take one of those belief statements. So this is an example for the community and relationships. Um so the belief is we believe in belonging and strong relationships. Then that group will look at the feedback, the data um and the research and say okay what are some of the indicators? What do we what do we expect to see if we are making success, if we're making progress? Um what are the strategies that we want to employ in order to achieve that? What are the action steps that we need to take in order to achieve that? And so this will be kind of the template that each of those groups will put together as they design that strategic plan.

That's it. So any questions from all of you?

questions.

I will start with a huge thank you. I know that is a lot boiled into a a pretty uh concise presentation. A lot of work done by a lot of people. So, thank you to the committee. Thank you to the people who participated in the surveys and the forums and the the feedback loops and it's it's a ton of work. Um and you know it's not done yet, right?

This is where it gets fun. Um, I did have one question because, uh, you know, I'm thinking back to the strategic plan we had previously and kind of common objectives or themes that were in that one. And one thing that jumped out to me that I didn't see in any of the themes or the the I believe or objective section was around like around the facilities and around, you know, more concrete parts of of the district literally, I guess. um it did that not come up? Is that embedded it somewhere in here? How do do we address that or um so there's a couple of different options, but in one it's like if these are the the goals that we have, what are the facilities that we need to have in order to support that learning and those objectives. Um, and then another option would be to like have another additional section where we like reach out specifically to facilities people and the ones that would be addressing that and have a conversation and add those pieces. But yes, you're right like that piece this was much more about the the learning the object what we wanted our students to be able to achieve at the end. So, but part of that is what are the structures the facilities that we need in order to be able to get those goals. So, thank you. Karen.

Yes. Thank you for all that work. Um I'm just kind of curious like how will some of these things be implemented into the school culture or into the day? You could speak on that. Um okay. Um well, I'll say first of all that I'm like really impressed with this district and how they've already really tried to incorporate faculty and getting their feedback. Um there's been multiple rounds where faculty have been a part of looking at the data, talking about the research. Um we're going to be coming back in March and sharing out where where we're at and getting their feedback again. And so I think part of that your question that you're you're asking is like how do you get people to actually engage in these documents so that it's not just something that like one person is the gatekeeper of or that it's a document that sits on a wall and nobody really like identifies with. And in part it's like having them be a part of the creation, the thought process, understanding where we are in that. Um and then and then ultimately it goes to to the district to the leadership that's here to say okay this is our strategic plan now. How are we going to do this?

How are we going to keep keep people engaged moving forward? So does that answer your question?

I think so. I guess I'm just wondering how this is going to be disseminated through our system here and really impact the students and how how that might work.

I I can say a bit about that. So where where we are right now is sort of like the philosophical underpinnings of the plan and that's what you've seen and the next step is okay so these are the things we believe in and value. Now what are the actions we're going to turn them into? That's what the plan becomes. And to me, that plan isn't finished in June. It's it's a draft of what we think at that time. And we'll have a structure in place to keep following up on the things we said we were going to do and seeing if we're doing them.

And you know, I imagine how they're implemented varies across districts. How we used the last plan we had was, you know, every the district as a whole and every school and in turn every administrator in in charge of those schools or those districts or those departments um when they came presented their goals for the year, they were tied to these are these are the highlevel objectives. These are the strategies we're undertaking now. These are the indicators to know if we're making success. So every every time we're looking at someone's goals, they should be tied to the strategic goal of the whole district, right? And it and then um and as it relates to the budget, right? If we are looking to add something or remove something or you know, like how does that stack up against our strategic plan, how does that move it forward or not move it forward at the at the pace that we'd like it to? Um so you know, how we choose to use it going forward, that's I guess up to us, but that is how we have used it in the past.

Yeah, thank you so much again for everybody for uh creating this. It's amazing amount of work. Um my question is about the portrait of a graduate and I'm curious kind of what you all were kind of using as kind of a um a benchmark kind of current state um that this portrait is compared against. In other words, um, Maria's here and theoretically our earlier plan was partially intended to help educate Maria and sort of create this graduate and becoming. Um, so how is it different?

Like what are we do? What are we looking to do? What kind of graduate are you looking to do now that is the attributes of which are a little different than what we were aiming for in the past?

Um I think that that it's really to your point lots of communities will go through a portrait of a graduate process and come up with similar types of hopeful goals right we want well uh healthy people that can go out they have options they have agency um there's there's sort of like they have the knowledge but they also have those interpersonal skills as well um and so but what I think is important is to always have that iterative process with your community to make sure that it's still aligned and that you're still um matched with the the population and the people that you're serving. Um and so um I don't think you had a portrait before.

Yeah. So so this is actually your first like this community's first portrait. Um and so it'll be interesting to see how how might that change right moving forward. um and there might not be major changes but there there might also be some based on uh you know advances in society and technology and our community and so forth. So having that process and having that opportunity and then the other thing I'll say which doesn't completely answer your question is a lot of people were like especially at the focus groups really appreciative of the opportunity to like have these conversations about what's happening in their schools. And so again, just opening that door and having that feedback back and forth is really important and valuable. Um, to kind of add on to your point, Erica, I definitely think that I I really did not know that this existed until Ren had emailed me about it, reaching out if I wanted to be a representative. And I really think that this strategic plan has so much student involvement and really values students opinions. I remember being at the we believe meetings and Miss Luchi asking me, "Oh, Maria, how do you feel about this?" And I definitely think that even if this if this is similar to something that you all have seen before, I definitely think that there is a lot of student involvement going into this and a lot of student care into this. I don't know if that answers your question, but just putting that out there.

I It's interesting you say that because um I love that. I don't recall that necessarily being as big a piece the last time we went through this process.

So, um you know, since that clearly is a priority for us in the district, good for us that we actually did it and involved it in the strategic plan uh process. I was curious about um the chart that you talked about blowing up with the different colors. And um I noticed that the constituency of student did not weigh in on those pillars or it was not provided to us. I was wondering if that was intentional or or kind of where they landed on that.

Um, this was the second round of feedback, not the first round. And um, it took play, we did it December into January. And so it was opened up. We didn't take time out of school to have each of the students like respond like we did with the first round. And so it just there wasn't as big of a response from students. Okay. For that second round of feedback.

Yeah. I was just curious kind of where they where they would have landed on what their chart would have looked like. Anna, I'm just curious. Thank you so much. Um I'm curious, how do you go how did you go through all the data to analyze and come up with emerging themes? Um I have a team and we have a director of um data and she uh like really heads that up.

Um, we had like rolls and rolls of chart paper that were transcribed by a whole team of us, myself included. Um, and then you just kind of start like theming it. You just kind of pull out the common and like clump them all together. Um, and then so Brienne, um, she's the Whitmer, she is the director, she, um, put together kind of a summary, um, which included the the main themes and the percentages for each of those of, and then she also had ones that broke it down by stakeholders. Um, then she pulls out language so that you still get some of that qualitative data as well. So like when I say this theme, these are kind of some of the statements that were clumped into that piece. Um because there is there's so much rich data in there. That's for like the focus groups.

Um with the the survey, it's much easier. There's a lot of like quantitative pieces because people are putting like a number behind it. Um but again with the open responses, you do a similar process. So So, do you need anything from us at this point or is this just informative from our perspective? I think we're Yeah, I think we're good.

Um, we appreciate um just the time to be able to share with you and looking forward to coming back in June before.

Thank you. All right. Thank you. Thanks.

All right. So, uh, we are at item seven on our agenda, which is public comment.

And when Erica is walking up, that usually means we have one. All right. Did my name fall down?

All right. Um, Jonathan, is it Jonathan Bell? Yes.

Oh, okay. So, you're good. Okay. All right. Well, then we will carry on. And we do have another one at the end.

So if you decide you want to say something then I will. Thank you so much.

Um all right. So we will move on to item eight. A report from the superintendent.

I have a couple of resignations to report. Allison Gin, our BCBA has resigned. And although it's not written on your agenda, more recently, Paul Carnen, uh special ed teacher at Freeport Middle School has resigned.

All right. And we don't have any administrator reports or board committee reports or policy review. All right. So, we will move on to item 12, unfinished business. Um, item one, start with superintendent's presentation of concept of district reconfiguration. That's a mouthful of a title.

Okay. So, right off, I'm going to own that I have taken heat for the colors I've chosen to use for my slideshow.

I'm told that it might not necessarily translate as beautifully up there as it does on my laptop, but I dug in my heels and I like these colors and is what we're going with and I feel good about it and that's what counts in this moment. Those are pow colors.

They are. They are tiger. Panther. It's a panther.

Durham is wrong.

So before I launch in, and of course you you have a copy of this in front of you, I I feel I do need to start with a reminder of why we are here and it's because back in November when I brought you the difficult news that if I were to carry forward a status quo budget, it would be 10ish%.

um you asked for tiers uh which we're talking about in an ongoing way, but you also asked for thoughts about how to make the budgets sustainable over the long term. So what I found having started here just this summer is that there have been conversations about that going on at the administrative level among the community members and there were already ideas that were out there being talked about. So what I I feel that I I want to be very conscious of my role here. My lane is to present you with options to consider. And what I'm asking tonight is these are the things I'm hearing talked about. Do you want them talked about more? Because um actually going down a formal rabbit hole as opposed to an informal rabbit hole takes a lot of time, energy, and work. So if you feel any of these ideas are worth exploring, we will gladly take that on. But if you see what's up here and think ew, I would just assume leave it alone. So up to you. I'm asking for guidance here. So I'm going to present to you in a way that I when I was a re teacher of research taught my students to be solutionary when I was a big fan of solutionary education which is present a menu of options and then freely discuss what makes these options either attractive or not attractive and put them in relationship to each other. So that's what I'm going to attempt to do tonight. So there are a number of lenses through which to view the entire sort of gestalt of what we're talking about.

First, what I think triggered the conversation is the ongoing financial pressure that we're facing. And since I have the microphone and I get to editorialize for a minute, um I think it's important to name that these ongoing financial pressures are because of the inflationary environment in which we live and they are not the fault of anybody living here in RSU5 or working here in RSU5. They are tough times and costs for lots of things keep going up.

So that is certainly a consideration.

Another consideration that is very compelling too is what kinds of what is the district that we want to be in the future. What do we want to provide for kids in the future?

So educational opportunity and equity of that opportunity across the district is a very important consideration.

And then just at sort of a more granular level, we have this early childhood mandate which requires us to um assume responsibility for special education for three and four year olds. We have just recently chosen to join cohort three, which means that next year we're bringing on the four-year-olds and then the year after that the threes. And we have a good solution right now for the fours that we're taking next year. We still have a lot of figuring out to do for the threes for the year after that.

So that fits in our long-term need in the category of long-term needs that we've got to contend with. So again, I am seeking your guidance here about what your overall direction you'd like to go in is.

So the I think that this is a really important sort of ordering of priorities that among us uh on the administrative team figures pretty prominently the needs of kids should always come first. We have two things here. We've got budget and what's good for kids and families.

Budget is important. I think what kids and families need is more important. So neither is unimportant but as I consider the whole picture I come back to what's best for kids and families as my primary consideration while holding both.

So again the lenses to view these are the the the major sort of crosscutting philosophical issues that have come up as we have discussed this and when I say we I mean me and the people sitting back there largely and and you know probably mostly Mr.

Pittton but whatever.

So early childhood programming, we are required to serve all three and four year olds who have IEPs but by July 2027 unless there be to eliminate confusion about that. The state's mandate is that every district has to do that by July of 2028. But we've now joined cohort 3. So we are committed to doing it by 2027.

That's year after next year.

Um, another issue that is prominent in our discussions is that we have two middle schools in the DI district and they're both great, but they're not necessarily great in the same ways. So we the lens of middle school equity and the possibility of actually being more expansive with our middle school offerings, especially as we've had budget conversations and we're talking about tough choices and tradeoffs.

The opportunity to switch from a retractive mindset to an expansive mindset is really appealing and to ensure that that is consistent for all kids in the district regardless of which town they live in.

Um then we have the financial sustainability lens short-term versus long-term costs in an environment that is inflationary and who knows how long it will be continue to be inflationary.

And then equally important to all of these is community identity and the connections in the towns. And I do want to stop there for a minute to just sort of talk a little bit about some experiences that I have had in my professional life before I came to this district. The two districts that I worked in previously both were facing the issue of small I mean very small tiny schools that were hard to keep going because of the economies of scale that they lacked and that is an issue that we are facing here and we have to talk about we have to put out in the open.

It's happening across the state and it's happening across the country.

So, first let me just sum up some of the major considerations for early childhood programming.

So, we've made the choice to join cohort 3. That means next year we're bringing on the four-year-olds who have IEPs.

And we are in a good we're in good shape to do that because we already have infrastructure for four-year-olds here.

And the amount of kids that we'll be taking on next year is not so dramatic that we can't absorb them with the existing infrastructure that we have.

That becomes tricky year after next when the three-year-olds come on because quite frankly we do not have a place to put them. We have not figured that out yet and I think it's very hard to figure out going on the way we are with our current facilities use.

Um how are we going to distribute the services for early childhood across the district?

And another conversation that should come up in all of this is whether we continue with the exclusively half-day prek model that we now have or should we offer some degree of full day prek.

There's lots of in between. There's going all half day, keeping all half day, going all full day, having some half day and some full day. There's all kinds of a whole spectrum of how that could be offered. But if we're looking ahead, that should be part of the conversation.

And my personal feeling, and I think others in the room would probably agree, even though most of my career was as a high school educator, I think this is the most important thing we have to do right now. The benefits that will happen for kids and families about doing early childhood correctly are an immediate payoff for the families who have those little kids. And all of the research suggests that particularly kids with needs, the earlier you intervene, the better the outcomes are. And districts who have already taken on this responsibility from CDS are already finding benefits.

Benefits like dismissing kids from special education earlier because their needs have been met earlier.

So I just think that's very important.

So ne next we've talked a lot about middle school stuff um particularly having a congruent and consistent middle school experience for kids all across the district um to be able to provide equity for athletics and extracurriculars in that mix.

And there is also I'm seeing that I have a capital B before I shouldn't have a capital B on the word before and I caught it before Caraka. So it makes me it makes me proud.

Um the uh and Jenny Jenny you were supposed to go through this anyway. Um, there has been a lot of conversation about whether or not it really benefits kids to have an opportunity to integrate as a district before high school. And there is a strong opinion in the room among the administrative team that that is a benefit to kids.

Right now, kids from Durham don't get to integrate into the district as a whole until they go to nth grade. and that is not necessarily the best scenario.

So there are other considerations for middle level education that we could think about in the future. Um we could f we could build on the very strong um model of STEM education we have in this district and integrate CTE which is career technical education.

there is the possibility to embed a teacher from region 10 into a middle school on their budget. Now, of course, we contribute to their budget, but um that is a model that I have seen in other districts and it's has a lot of benefits for kids.

We've had conversations about world language in connection with the budget.

Um, if we do something different with middle school, we may be able to make world language truly accessible and expanded in grades seven and eight.

And I I want to take a moment to pause right there while I consider world language because we've talked about this in other contexts, but I think a dynamic of it that has not been fully fleshed out that we're going to have to keep talking about is that in um Freeport Middle School, we do something that I haven't seen another uh district do, a middle school do, which is to offer both science and STEM as core classes. and that what and that's fantastic, but knowing that there's only so many minutes in a day, that's a a core class added to this core classes that we don't have for electives. So, or unified arts and so that's a constraint on the schedule on the unified arts side that forces us to talk about choices.

So, and also in a moving on to the next bullet, in a consolidated middle school, which is an idea where we'd be going, you'll see in future slides, there's greater opportunity for interdisciplinary teaching, which is frankly the best kind of teaching.

So, this is just another aspect of the conversation. And then financial sustainability.

So, we need to have an eye on the long term.

We're right now contending with decisions that um are hard right now, but they only get harder if they're not made now. And so, we need to keep that in mind knowing that inflation has a magnified impact on deferred decisions. And there are efficiencies in consolidating programming rather than having it be dislocated across the district and and using our facilities in a more streamlined way.

So again, this was the trigger I think that prompted you back in November to ask me to talk about long-term solutions. Um, and it is something we have to consider, but I think that the things on the previous two slides to me personally are more important.

And then next something that we cannot underestimate which is the fact that feelings are as important as thoughts and and ideas and that is that community identity is very powerful and it's real and it should be honored. So each school in the district is an expression of its community's identity.

They are dear to the people in those communities. people have connections and um important memories and historical relationships and all of that um is as valid as anything else in the conversation.

So now I'm going to talk about three scenarios.

The three scenarios are the ones that we have sort of talked about at the admin level. Scenario number one, steady on, keep on as we are. So this is the current district configuration of grade levels.

And I probably don't need to review it for anybody on the board, but if there are members of the public watching. So in Durham, all kids grades preK through grade 8 are at Durham Community School.

And then at 9th grade go to Freeport High School.

For Freeport, preK to grade two are at Mor Street.

Grades three to five are at Mass Landing.

Grades six through eight are at Freeport Middle. And then grades 9 to 12 are at Freeport High School. And then for Powell, grades preK to five are at Poundell Elementary.

Grades six and eight are at Freeport Middle. Grades 9 through 12 are at Freeport High School. So everybody comes together at the high school level.

Freeport and Pal come together at the middle school level. Durham is the one that does not join till the high school level.

So if we keep this model, we based on my best you know summary at the moment. Some things that we preserve. We preserve the sense of community and town identity which is important to a lot of people.

The neighborhood schools remain as sources of town pride and identity as they have.

We would still have early childhood in each town. Right now, each town has public pre-k.

We have it at Powell. We have it at Durham. We have it at More Street. Half day.

And in providing that, we're giving lots of kids a soft entry into public school in each town. And that m that mitigates transitions to kindergarten. And that has a lot of benefits.

And in a time when we're talking about lots of potential changes, it is the least amount of change in the short term and that has value.

So our facilities are used this way. We would not have to make a facilities investment to keep going in the way that we're going other than to keep maintaining our current facilities.

I guess I should add add a caveat to that. We're going to keep going to where we're going and we're going to add early childhood which involves three-year-olds and that will involve some level of putting them somewhere and doing something with where we put them. Um, but we are adapted to this model. So again, I want to stress the intangibles are very important and that community sentiment has to be honored.

So at the same time the limitations of the current configuration is that it's not very efficient um for early childhood in particular as we consider having to bring on and provide special education services for three-year-olds and foury olds.

Um, as I've said already, we don't have a good plan or a good option at the moment for space for the three-year-olds.

Um, but we could gain and we lose efficiencies by having the services spread out.

We're having um, you know, there's some level of itinerant staff which is not terribly efficient.

um we have a more limited o ability to offer full day programming for early childhood if we wanted to do that.

If we look at the middle school situation, I would say both Freeport Middle School and Durham Community School are great schools, but again, they're not great in the same way and they're not equal. And um Durham has not does not have the same level of access to extracurriculars and athletics as Freeport Middle School. Um the academic offerings in the two schools are not the same. The STEM situation that I mentioned to you a minute ago is present for Freeport Middle School kids but not in Durham.

Durham offers STEM but not at the same level. Um, presently Durham has Spanish but not French and there are other things. And we have talked we a lot about the dynamic of Durham students especially enter high school and they have not really been integrated with the other district kids until that moment.

And just in terms of financial sustainability, the trajectory looks very difficult with the current model because we're operating multi-purpose facilities in an inflationary environment and in some ways we're duplicating staff and resources because of the multiple locations. we're paying mileage and and another aspect of it is that pound deer as it is just does not have efficiencies of scale because of its size and there's a disproportionate amount of cost associated with that.

So here's the fundamental question for keeping things the way they are as I see it.

Can we address the early childhood mandate and the middle school inequities and the financial pressures if we keep on in this way?

Those are the three like pressure points at the moment that I see. Early childhood, middle school stuff and the financial pressure. They're pushing on each other. So, which direction do we go with that?

Okay. So, alternatives.

Why should we even consider alternatives? Why should a brand new superintendent come into a district and touch a third rail?

Um, I Okay, if I hit pause for a moment, completely honestly with you, when I got that when you graciously offered me this job, I thought that is great. I'm going to come in there. I'm going to learn names. I'm gonna figure out where the bathrooms are. I'm going to just sort of like step in slow and sort of learn the lay of the land. And I that's just not the moment that the district is in. It's never our moment. No. So, I guess I'm I just believe me or don't believe me. This is not me coming in here wanting to be a cowboy.

it is just because this is the conversation that I've walked into and what my intention is is to make it talkable.

So, we've got to do something with early childhood whether we Well, clearly we want to because we decided to last week, right? So, we're doing it. Um the middle school issue is real. Um, I I don't think we do our kids justice if we don't talk about that and figure out a way forward that considers all the variables.

The budget pressure is real. Um, again, I don't think anybody wants to be the brand new superintendent that comes into a district and says, "What do you want me to do with this budget that's going to be like $2 million more expensive than maybe you were counting on?" So we just we have to deal with it even if we have to have hard conversations.

Um and we are perhaps the stars aligned in this way. We're doing a strategic plan. Um that's an opportunity to talk about where we are going.

So this is a conversation starter. If you decide that it ends today, then it well it'll probably go on in the sidelines anyway, but they won't go on in a formal way. But once conversations start, you never know where they're going to go. So there could be other ideas that emerge after today.

Anyway, scenario number two is to repurpose the pal school as an early childhood center.

This would require shifting all around the district and I've tried to capture that here. Um, but it does not require us to build any new facilities and it is pretty manageable shifting. So if we did this, Powell would become a district-wide prek/prechool preschool center.

It has enough space for that to happen.

We could also locate a lot of the special education services for early childhood in that building colllocated together.

That provokes the question, where do the Pel kids go? Well, the early childhood panel kids kids go to Panel. Then when they get to kindergarten and go through grade six, they go to Durham.

What happens to Durham then? Is Durham not overcrowded? Well, no, because Durham's seventh and eighth grade kids are roughly equal in number to the countel grades K to six. So Durham's seventh and eighth would go to Freeport Middle.

But wait, do we have enough space for those kids at at Freeport Middle? Well, we do if Freeport Middle becomes a district-wide seven and 8 grade school. Now, currently Freeport Middle has sixth grade. But if we shift sixth grade back to Mass Landing and have Mass Landing become grades four, five, six as opposed to 3, four, five.

And then back that up to Mor Street where remembering that the prek has gone out to Powell.

More street becomes kindergarten 1 2 3. There is space for all of this.

And of course the high school remains the high school.

So by consolidating that way and I should add how does this create the space for the three-year-olds that I've mentioned? Well, it's because we can there is enough space at Pel to do that and to a certain degree you can group three-year-olds with foury olds. And then that might provoke the question, well if you can do that why don't we just do that with the existing model?

It's because it's very inefficient. I mean, we can do that, but that doesn't solve the problem of colllocating the services in a streamlined way.

So, this scenario has some real benefits.

It would really be a profound investment in early childhood. We would dedicate an entire building to it, an entire um really delightful building to it that is really well situated to do really cool things with outdoor play, play-based early childhood.

Um consolidating the services, perhaps making it easier to have full day offerings to expand the outdoor play-based model with the three-year-olds. And it that is just a really good fit.

And it also solves the issue of middle school integration. All the seventh and eighth graders in the district would be together in one building. They would have consistent offerings both academically and extracurricularly.

Um they would get to all come together before 9th grade and establish a sense of you know being one district.

So there are also financial considerations.

I don't want to stand here and promise that this will save jillions of dollars, but it will likely save some money. Um, you know, you might think at first, well, we would be eliminating all of the teaching positions at Powell. That is not actually the case.

um many of those people would go to the other schools where the kids would move, but there would be savings.

Um having a single early childhood facility versus multiple sites is savings in and of itself. Um there are long-term operational efficiencies that are possible if you do this as opposed to keeping things the way they are.

The big downside is that this is a significant significant impact to communities especially Powell and the Powell school is dearly loved and for good reason and we have to consider that it would also be a change in Dur for Durham. It would be Durham's kids um you know Durham's littles and Freeport's littles going out to Powell.

But for Durham, their middle school kids would be coming into Freeport earlier than they do now. And that's a change that could be difficult.

It would create a shared new identity.

So those are just some at first blush of the factors to consider if we did that.

And then the next scenario is a very interesting one that I have heard more than one person discuss and that was okay we could do a district-wide sixth grade at Powell Elementary School. So in this scenario, we kind of keep things as they are in more ways than in the previous one. But all the sixth graders go out to panel and have this one sort of like very philosophically different sixth grade experience than what we're currently doing. It would have to be philosophically different because all the specials and things, art, music, PE, etc. would have to be kind of folded into the experience.

um probably focused on outdoors adventure education.

Don't have that concept fully fleshed out yet, but people have talked about it. Um panel prek to 5 would um go to DCS.

So the panel kids are still leaving Panel and going to Durham in this scenario, but they're coming back in sixth grade. And then Durham's sixth grade would go to Powell as everyone's sixth grade would. And seventh and eighth grade would go to Freeport Middle.

So benefits to this, we could potentially have this really cool sixth grade year that is very different from anything that we're currently doing. Um, there seems potential for experiential education with an outdoor focus. It's right up against Bradbury Mountain.

That's also a benefit if we put early childhood there.

And it could create this interesting bridge year between elementary and middle school. And it could achieve that middle school integration factor even earlier than we talked about.

The shortcomings that I saw are is that we don't really achieve the middle school efficiencies in the same way. Um the sixth grade program, you've got to think about all the things you have to have in a building to have a grade level there. So art, music, world language, life skills, special education, etc.

We'd have to find a way to achieve that with sixth grade. It's not the same. You do have to think about those things for early childhood but not in the same way and we still have not achieved the maximum the best solution for early childhood if we do this and it's still a significant change for pal especially um new shared identity for grade for grades six through 8.

So, this scenario has been talked about.

Perhaps you can tell. I don't think this scenario is as viable as some of the others, but it has been talked about and it could be talked about more.

So bringing us back to the broader view, we are living in a moment of complexity both with the budget and with this proposition, the budget for next year and for the vision for longer term. And I think what these moments are asking us to do is something that's very hard, which is to hold a lot of true things at the same time. And I think what we see in the world today is that when people are challenged to do that, they become reductive and they reduce it to rights and wrongs, um, anyone who's ever taken ethics courses, which I imagine some people in the room have, ethical dilemmas are actually never a right versus a wrong. That's a moral dilemma. An ethical dilemma is when you have a right versus a right. It is right on the one hand to preserve panel exactly the way it is because it's important. It is also right on the other hand to think about changing it because there could be possibilities there. It's how you balance those things and hold them both to be true while making a decision that is what makes it complex.

So here's where I kind of wrap this up.

I need to know where you'd like to go with this.

Um, I hope nobody in any of the towns is ready to burn me an effigy right now for making this. I'm just trying to make it talkable.

Um, what's most important to you in your decision- making? Do based on what you've seen here, are we justified in carrying forward this this conversation?

I think I'll just stop there. It's really what it is. Where would you like to go from here?

Lois.

Yes. Yeah. Just so I am open to any of these. Let me start by saying that I would encourage everyone here to start at the end of Flying Point Road and pretend you are on a bus as a three-year-old and drive or perhaps have the bus take you from the end of Flying Point Road to Panel with stops along the way.

My concern is that three year olds would be on the bus for perhaps an hour or more. It doesn't mean that it wouldn't work. It means that we have to consider, as you say, the child, not the dollar, not the parent. We have to consider what's going on with the child here. And a three or four year old, that's a long drive. That's Are we there yet? Are we there yet? Twice a day.

my opinion.

Yeah. No, it's um the the transportation piece is a is an important one. I think regardless or irregardless which one is it either regardless regardless of what early education early childhood we end up with how we handle three-year-olds getting them to school every day. Um and then you know these are also three-year-olds that may have particular needs. So, um, whether that's on a bus or not is probably it's probably not a bus. It's probably a van, but it the the point is still the same. Um, yeah, certainly um certainly something to think about because we do have a pretty um wide geography. I think actually Durham, the geography of Durham for the number of people is is pretty big. Not a lot of people. So, you can be pretty far from any of the schools.

like yeah that that is true but I also want to point out I think people often think that panels in the middle of nowhere like hours away um it's from more street school about eight minutes to get to PES so I just want to point that out too takes me 10 minutes to get here I have to drive past the school it's not as far as people think it is I we we run across the same thing in in Durham people think we're you know you know past Turner and and hang a right and then you'll get to Durham. Um it's not it's not as far as you think. Second start of the right.

Yes, exactly. Halfway on till morning or something. Um I I want to start with a a big thank you because I this is a brave thing to undertake. I mean we told you to but it is still brave. Um you know this is these are not easy conversations. Um, and I appreciate the care with which you laid out, you know, you didn't you didn't avoid the hard parts to just avoid them, right? You laid them all out like these are some of the benefits, these are some of the challenges we would face in any of these situations. Um, and I think, you know, the idea of keeping it about what is best for kids in our district, um, from a whole variety of perspectives of what's best, um, I think will will serve us well in this discussion. Um, but I feel like this is a really a really, um, sensitive but open way to start the conversation. Kelly.

So it looks like part of the driver of you know thinking about reconfiguring is the early childhood space consideration.

And so I would be curious to know if not pound um what does this look like for us in a way that is actually feasible that we can you know not be having to have resources in every school. It sounds like that could add up to a lot of positions and um I can answer a little bit of that right now and there are others in the back row who could answer it better than I can, but so you can under the state's mandate um for special kids for three-year-olds who have an IEP, they can be grouped with four year olds. So they could be brought in where we have four year olds.

Um to the extent that we will have space, I don't know that we'll I don't know that we'll fully have the space with the existing facilities the way they're configured. Um there is also the option to push our services out to community providers. Um those community providers have to have a certain star rating from the state. Um not all the providers in the community have that.

And when we discussed this with the early childhood task force, we run up against the inefficiency of like pushing our people. We're paying the mileage, which takes time to get out there. We're paying them to get out there. The setting in those community daycarees or providers may not be conducive to providing the services. So, it's possible, but it's not ideal. We there was a strong sentiment that it's better for those kids if we do it in our facility with our people.

If I may have a moment of polyiana optimism, um I do think we have the opportunity with options two and three to kind of maybe celebrate that we're a district, a cohesive diff district. I know that I've heard in this community complaints that the high school is called Freeport and that it's all three of us. And so there's a possibility that all of our students would be enjoying the facilities at Powell in both options two and three and kind of make us more of a cohesive unit whereas now we're only joining at the high school. And so I do like that aspect of these proposals. I think it's nice to kind of reinforce that we are in fact one one unit.

Thank you so much for this. I think this is really well put together and I really appreciate how you have made it talkable. So thank you for that. Um, and your question, what factors are most important in our decision- making? The first thing that came to my mind is where is the most like developmentally appropriate what is the most developmentally appropriate environment for students? Um, and it does sound like I do like the idea of an early childhood education center and and and space. My question is more around the middle school piece, too. And this is the first that I've heard that there have been that there's been a desire for the Durham's seventh and eighth graders to join earlier and that there's a that there might be a challenge in them integrating in ninth grade. And so I'd like to hear a little more about that.

And um I'd like to hear more about that.

Um, I I will start, but then I'm going to ask Will maybe to come on down. So, I can just tell you, come on down, Will. Um, when I first arrived here, that conversation was pretty strong and that sentiment was made really clear to me and people were asking me to somehow bring that out into the open. And I don't know that everybody feels that way, but enough people do that it should be talked about.

Jen's teeing herself up behind her because she knows she's next.

Uh, well, good evening. Oh, it's a little louder this week. Um, so just to circle back to your question, I don't think that there's necessarily um a response that says there's a this is not a conversation that has really necessary been aired publicly.

What I would say is that over the years it is a conversation that has been discussed at administrative meetings over the last few years and um when Ray Grogan was here as principal at Freeport Middle School and had his own students at the high school and involved with sports teams, his own children I should say, he would bring up that how noticeable he felt like it still was for some of the Durham kids to sort of like hang in their groups of long-term relationships and friendships.

those that were involved in sports or drama or music in other activities would kind of bond or merge in those ways. Um but for others, you know, they stayed with their kind of cohorts that they had and that um you know, you talk developmentally, it is easier to connect with people as an early adolescent, even though that's a tricky time, than as a ninth grader where um there's different social pressures and things that people are navigating.

So it had been a conversation um with uh the last couple of years but never quite got beyond that piece of being conversations at the administrative level.

So as such it's not been a topic where we have gone to community members or to families to say hey you know how would you feel about this? What would this look like? informally when we see um families because obviously as you might imagine we have some families who have been with the school um who have several children so they'll come back to pick up their younger ones and we check in hey how's so and so doing up at the high school and um I would say that pattern has held true for for those involved in specific sort of extracurricular um type activities there's a connection Um, for some of those who haven't, it's sometimes been a trickier um, uh, transition and they've sort of stayed within their their particular um, kind of cohorts. Um, so, you know, it is it has been in that in that vein. I can't say to you, oh, and there's all this background information behind it.

Because equally, in the same way that Tom has sort of stressed that um, you know, we are very committed to making the prek experience the best it can be. And so that's sort of like our focus. We certainly don't want to um put doubts upon the model in which people are in. The um the piece I would say that goes along with that just in terms of the last couple of budget cycles that we've had conversations about it has been tricky where we've faced conversations specifically about FMS staffing and models and and schedules and offerings and Darham and as Tom said they're both great schools and they're great in different ways and I feel that there's been this desire and effort to um have shared and similar opportunities for kids. So when they come together in ninth grade, it's not possible in the models that we have um when we share uh unified arts teachers from prek through 8 compared to those who are focused specifically on early adolescence and the kind of experiences they can offer. Um, ever since the um, RSU5 came together, there was great efforts on behalf of Freeport Middle School and um, Craig Sickles was the AD at the time and it's been continued by Eric to offer some of the sports across both schools. It means that currently for football, Freeport Middle School football players will wait before they can commence practice so that Durham finishes school. um close to an hour later and we dismiss them a little bit early so they can be transported down uh to meet with their uh teammates. But those little facets are evident throughout where somebody's waiting, somebody's being slightly compromised. There's additional transportation. Um for some of the sports, they're just not possible. We don't have enough. We have kids who ski but not enough uh to run a separate ski team or ski program. um and then coming together at a high school level at that point you've kind of missed some of those opportunities to connect and to sort of grow those sort of skills. So there's a range of those sort of facets that exist in a perfect scenario. Um as you were just mentioning, you know, that notion of shifting from an RSU 5 to a district type of experience and district kind of thinking, um it holds a lot of appeal and potential. Um, but I can't say that we've had big community conversations about it because we haven't. You want to add anything to Good evening everybody. Jen Gul from the high school. Um, I think there's lots that I can add. Uh, I I wonder if there's questions too that you have. Um, I think in general, Will said a lot of the points that I would make that I think I have seen, this is my 11th year here, and I think over the time that I have been here, I've seen this real concerted effort to deliberately have our eighth graders getting to know each other sooner um than just when they're coming in on their first day of school. And I I I certainly think that that has helped, but that has come from realizing just what he's saying for our students who are not connected to a particular group or activity or or uh athletic team or our drama program or music. We we really need to be thoughtful in how are we helping them to create relationships. I also think that there is a lot to be said about going through with the same cohort of kids from grades K to 8. I have a my own child did something similar to that in a program in Portland. They're a little bit like friends and siblings. And so I think that there can be benefits to that. I do think that it's a real skill for kids to be able to walk into a classroom with kids that they've never met before and how are they working with those students? how are they forming friendships, relationships, and um that that takes effort for us to make sure that all of our students are doing that.

Um and I think it's a different experience for the kids who have done multiple transitions to multiple classrooms versus being in a smaller program. I think um there's benefits to both, but I I certainly think um there's times where we have seen a difference with that. I don't know if there's questions that I can answer.

I know academically that has been another area that we have tried to align the middle schools a little bit more in terms of um trying to ensure that regardless of which middle school they went through, they were kind of coming in with the same level of preparation for their academic classes. I I'm thinking specifically of math. Um h has that been enough? Do you I mean I I know it's been a concerted effort, but is it is it um is it showing up in results that that's working? Is it enough?

I think that there Well, I think Will can speak to this as well. I think that um I would say particularly right before COVID that we were doing a lot more work vertical work 6 through 12. I think that there has been from my perspective and will can share that there's been a lot of collaboration across the two schools but logistically it's challenging just the things of um on early release days we tend to be building based because we would have to wait an hour for our teachers to meet with the Durham teachers which we did in this early release day but then it gives a shorter chunk of time. So the whole benefit of the early release is to have this larger chunk of time. And so in my mind, I think there are some logistical very real challenges of having the eighth grade teachers from the um DCS being able to meet consistently and frequently with the Freeport Middle School teachers because we have that challenge within our own building that sometimes if our teachers schedules don't match, we are really having to get creative about the time when they're able to collaborate, which makes a difference in alignment.

you know, true alignment comes from when teachers have time for planning and it's consistent and frequent. Um, and I think, you know, again, Will can give more information about that, but I think that that certainly in my mind is still a challenge.

Thank you.

I'm not sure if you were asking specifically around sort of like academic comparisons, but certainly from curriculum delivery, um, we try to align programs. Um, and as we talked about before, there are some where like we don't match the amount of science and STEM that can be offered. We don't have that capacity of teaching. Um and uh but we do certainly with the math um and um the language arts also has similar programming uh approaches to it. So there that we try to align as best we can so that when children coming in they will have similar experiences to then build upon you know for the high school for freshman classes.

Yeah. And that's I thought what that's what I thought your answer was going to be which is good right. I mean, I I think it's important to say that, you know, the the middle school experience that they're getting in German is is not substandard or subpar in any way. Um, but, you know, could we make it even better for everybody? I mean, that's a really interesting idea.

Well, I think that's part of some of the pieces that Tom alluded to across any of the models. What we've been looking at is budget-wise, it's just really tricky when there's models of inefficiency.

So, in a similar way, when there's a small elementary school, a small middle school is going to be constrained by opportunities it can offer. Um and so then when we talk about um ways to sort of solve you know challenges of that start to push upon inequities but then equally feel like does one place have to lose something in order to maintain status quo. Um, and I think that's again sort of like what Tom was alluding to is there opportunities to um, you know, whenever possible you want to be able to level up, not level down and that but financially leveling up in inefficient numbers, schools that have smaller numbers that make staffing inefficient, it's tricky. Um, you know, there's small pieces that really drive our schedule that people may or may not be aware of is that because we compete against middle schools with sports teams. Um, but we run on an elementary school schedule because of high school busing. Um, it means that our middle schoolers u at the end of the day we they will often have to leave school early because when we play an away game, we're playing against a middle school who have finished at 2:20 when we don't finish till 3:15. Um when we have home games, they play on our schedule, but it's impactful. Um it means that if we have shared staff with the middle school, which we do, we share a math teacher, that person runs on a Durham day, but we have to have we have to run our schedule around their afternoon um availability.

And so all of a sudden, your school schedule gets locked in because we have a middle school and an elementary school schedule. And it's it those things become sort of log jams. So there there's small subtleties like that that um and I agree with you Michelle. I think it is important to really stress um we feel super fortunate. We have some outstanding middle school teachers as you know um and um who really do an excellent job and um and know the children really well. Um they loop with them. and they teach seventh and eighth grade both. Um, which is, you know, I've worked in straight middle schools where we've also looped, found it a really powerful model. Um, so I don't think we are necessarily compromising children, but we're really looking at what opportunities exist that also kind of meet our district needs for how do we grow efficiently and sustainably. So, for the for the record, my son really appreciated getting out early to go to soccer games. Yeah.

He loved that he missed an hour and a half of school.

Yeah. Well, that was right because he supported Manchester United. It had been another team we had to talk about it. Fair enough.

Any other specific questions while we have Will and Jen right there or Okay. Uh Anna, just a quick um question about the scenario two and three.

Would we have enough room at Freeport Middle School for it to be six through eight?

No. So, six would go to Mass Landing. Six would go to In scenario two. Yeah. Six would go to Mass Landing.

That's right. Durham, right? Durham would stay six. Durham would keep it sixth grade. Got it. Yes. Okay.

and pound the panel K to five go to Durham and that K to six sorry because the six would have been going to Freeport Middle now they go to Durham and the offset is Durham's seventh and eighth go to Freeport Middle and it's prek goes to Powell and I guess the follow-up question is uh you said that the third scenario with the sixth grade having this experience year had also been talked about in the margins for a while. Um, is it just mostly is it because the sixth grade thinking like the bridge year between elementary and middle or like why why the sixth grade?

Um, I think that that was what was primarily attractive about that idea. Um, and I could probably call Will back.

Come on, Will.

Okay, the cat's out of the bag. This was kind of a Will Pittton idea, but others really just walks out the door. I'm gonna end it now.

Well, um in case anyone wanted another time, the um the reason this had come up um previously was that um we'd also looked at really in an ideal world six through eight would be together, right? And to be honest with you, we've brainstormed a variety of different thoughts. You know, how viable are modular buildings, modular buildings shortterm? How viable is a financial demand to expand a middle school? You know, and how long do those things wait? And then if they become, you know, you start talking facilities, is it middle school or is it more street? Is it is it regional middle uh elementary school? There's so many long-term conversations that could potentially delay a impactful decision. And and again, I think the important thing here is that I can't stress enough how we've tried to always as again I'm going to turn back to the beginning of Tom's presentation.

The focus has always been like is there a way that we can have a really rich uh experience for students that doesn't compromise students whilst recognizing the need for a sustainable budget for the communities and um and that is what sort of like driven the kind of brainstorming and thinking.

So without the capacity for a 6 through8 facility in the current model, we've also talked about what do you move people around? You put the six through eight school in Durham and you know what does that look like? But that unfortunately it doesn't leave enough other spaces for what we need. So um but you know I guess I would say that if it's any of these conversations as Tom said if there was an interest to move forward then at that point people dig deeper into what viability exists. But so the idea of sixth grade at Pano was um currently um our sixth graders go to um the 4 camp beginning of fifth grade. I think Mars landing students go in fifth grade um to camp and um I'm not sure what grade does FMS still do a camp please in the past. So there was a sense that like okay there's some common experiences children entering early adolescence um starting to navigate some of those pieces um in our sports leagues that our schools are a part of sports teams are for seventh and eighth grade.

So it's not like sixth grade necessarily be compromised in that regard. They already have some camp experiences in different settings but through that same sense of bringing kids together and developing community. So the conversation was if the focus was upon bringing middle school kids together as early adolescence as opposed to ninth graders, do we like double down on that and do we take this sort of rich commitment to um wanting uh sort of science and STEM experiences? And in the previous strategic plan, one of the big features of that was that children are learning in uh having opportunities for experiential learning and um that you've got an amazing setting in Po uh relative to just it's the school setting relative to Bradbury Mountain and the park.

Is that a place where you actually bring together all the children uh to get together to beginning their secondary school years six through 12 um in a way that then they go to camp as a cohort or camp experience is designed around that sort of cohort. You've got access to uh lots of sort of place-based learning opportunities right there in the park.

um that we do we really emphasize that experiential year of building culture and community in in in a creative way for their learning that this sets them up as they then travel as seventh and eighth graders to um middle school in Freeport. So that was kind of the thinking behind it. Again, none of these things have really been unpacked thoroughly because of, you know, really to be able to just air the conversations and see if there's any desire to pursue them any greater.

I'm not sure if that answers it in any way. Okay, I've got some more ideas if you want to hear them.

Your time is is ticking down here between here and June. So, Karen, did you you look like you're about to hit your button.

So I have a question about scenario two where that would be the early childhood center and I don't know how many classrooms are in panel currently but would that space be utilized fully with an early childhood center or how does that look?

The consensus at the moment is that we would need the whole building for an early childhood center. I can say that on top of that, just sort of another level of this, it's not in the slideshow, but Peter Wagner and I have talked about being able to expand community programs offerings largely after school at Panel to try to maintain more of a sense of, you know, to keep it a vital place. Um, and there is an opportunity for that to happen out there. But we would I can't remember exactly how many classrooms there are in that building, but let's see. We've got one for each grade level. We have a library, music room, art room, STEM room. Seven.

Plus four more. Yeah. 11.

And then the gym. um that includes the specials and all the Yeah.

And when we consider that we would need classroom space, but we would also need spaces for um services to be provided because this is largely driven by a special education commitment. Um we would definitely need all the space. Now with that said, another aspect that we haven't fully discussed is we may every district in the state is contending with what to do with early childhood. Some are better positioned than others with regard to facilities.

those who have the greater challenges may look to contract with other districts to so and I have had conversations with other superintendents in neighboring districts who have said that if we had a center like that and had space they would have children to send to us to pay tuition.

So, I don't want to overpromise on that, but that's definitely something that could manifest.

May I ask then, um, do we have any numbers? I know there's nothing solid probably, but for next year, the year after is this, this proposal, I guess, is it not for fall of 26? It's for fall of 27, I would. Well, that would that would be great if that could happen then. Um, I mean, we have numbers of four year olds that are coming in next year, but that number, as Julie mentioned to me the other day, what we're experiencing now that we've joined cohort three, and I don't know if you want to talk about this, Julie, but it's sort of a now that we've built it, people know we've built it, and they're kind of coming out.

We haven't even built it yet.

We said we would. We Yeah.

Yeah. I think what we are realizing is is the numbers currently provided by CDS, they're not necessarily reliable.

We ran our preK um screenings last Friday and we've already kind of identified five more children that will be referred and our early intervention team are part of those screenings. They have a really, you know, usually if they're unsure, we kind of just wait. So the fact that they're recommending that we move forwards, the likelihood of them qualifying is pretty high. Um two of whom, you know, have more needs than, you know, just an articulation thing. So um I think what panel I I don't think it's really been talked about but the potential of having an early childhood center is that we can start to talk about whether we want Currently we have half day prek which is um restrictive for some families who need full day care. Lots of families choose to have their children in two settings and it works really well and it and it has been great for many years. But I think if we were to move towards a full day, 4-day program, four-year-old program, we would see more, our numbers would be higher.

So right now we have eight pre-k classrooms across our district. So that's half day. I would imagine once we if we were to move to a full day programming where we would probably fill another classroom and we have restrictions on prek. So, you know, when we talk class sizes at all the other grades, we can make those decisions, whereas we have restrictions on prek that are mandated by the state that we cap at 16. So, you know, it it like the the capacity shifts depending on what we're offering. Um, I had worked I'm like, you know, just sitting penciling the kind of things we would need in that setting. So if we're then thinking about the mandate is to provide special ed services for three-year-olds, but if we were to offer kind of three-year-old programming, if we had full day prek classrooms, let's say that moves to nine, and then we were like, maybe we should be offering half day three-year-old programming.

Then we're looking at potentially four sessions, two classrooms that we need to do that. And then we've got a special ed classroom that we're already proposing that we're adding. So another space and then you're going to want I mean we're going you need a gym like all the movement kind of pieces that you would want as well as the outside um space. Um and then you've got your speech and your OT and you know our OT's are always fighting for space in my school particularly. They would love a big space to have lots of equipment. um you know that just the potential of what we could offer in that kind of environment would be is exciting in lots of ways but I I think without a doubt we would fill that space.

Do you feel that the space would be too small eventually?

Who knows? But there's lots of space to add on out there. So Okay. Thank you.

just um kind of want to share my initial thoughts and I I think um one of the things that I have love about this district is um how how much we talk about equity and actually we don't just talk about it. We are an incredibly equitable district. Um, and I think that this proposal really um I think it it it makes our district just that much stronger because we this um we're giving if if we if we make these changes, we are giving our our students they're all on the same playing field.

It's a kind of a level playing field for everybody. It it um it just makes our district more inclusive. Um, and I say this as a panel resident, um, who, so I'm kind of thinking of both sides of this. Um, any if we do decide to go forward with one of these, um, options, it will disproportionately affect panel.

So, I just want to kind of say that, but um, I think in a in a lens of equity, it's kind of a no-brainer.

I think it makes a lot of sense. Yeah. I would also just thank you, Tom, and the administrators for for putting this together and uh for getting this out in the open. And um I'm I think one of my reflections is just um I can understand all of the reasons why it hasn't been, but I just I do find myself saying like would have been great to have talked about this three years ago.

Um which again is not a that's not a criticism of anyone. It's but more we know exactly where he was um because we looked into it.

Uh, we had our people up there. Um, I think what I'm over here experiencing is sort of a sense of like, um, I have a, as my wife will attest to, um, I can shift into like a hyperrational mode, um, that kind of like is hard to budge me from. Um, and I'm over here trying to budge myself out of that mode, but I'm finding myself just like within that frame of really thinking about this in terms of the like how the pragmatic elements of this really add up. Um, the second uh scenario just seems like the I appreciated you saying all of the things about the it's not right versus wrong, it's right versus right, but I would say the the rights in um scenario 2 are just so strong. They're just so um uh again and I'm I will I'm totally owning that that is coming from a very rational place of just like a place of like where you put all of the pieces together um it makes sense in so many ways. Um so I just I I just want to say that and I think I think I would encourage us as a board to um urge you to continue to pursue that one. I'm not as keen on the third, though. It kind of I get like a little bit of um that one's giving a little bit of like old uh soul school vibes. Um where my wife went and and Lois's mom taught. Um and so the idea of like having that like sixth grade um experience does like that sort of that's very exciting. But like um so I guess it is knocking against my rationality but like the but the but again in keeping the like the the fact that we still have the distributed prek and all of those other pieces. Um so I would just encourage us to to pursue the second option. Um with a real eye toward I guess three things. One um can we push ourselves to do this by the fall of 27?

Um and what would that look like? Um two, I think the the number of rational benefits or sort of pragmatic benefits becomes even stronger um if the financials um really kind of support that, right?

If we can really see if we really can have an understanding of um what like what footing does that put us on um and uh can we see a real difference between status quo um or the status quo which is not status quo even though I'm not like I agree yes we can keep going with that but I guess the third thing is like to just understand if we were to stick with status quo what would have to change because something would have to change because we'd have to we'd probably build a new building just to be blunt. Like I don't think we're going to get too much farther um the way things are going without having to look at that as a question. So I don't really think that um the status quo is status quo. I think it's really saying what are some of the costs on there. So I think I would just encourage us to to I would um encourage us as a board to encourage you to look into that. Um, and also just I know the fall 27 seems like a little astonishing as an idea, but it's also like once we sort of have the idea um and once we start to recognize again the obligations that we would have um to the uh prek with the the three-year-olds. Again, I think it just there's so many things behind that that line up so powerfully.

Yeah, I agree with Colin that you've made a pretty strong case that um one of these scenarios and scenario two I'd say seems the strongest is a really can be a really positive thing for our district in terms of the addressing the inequities as well as really gaining us some um financial efficiency. And my one question I guess is if we decide to move forward with kind of fleshing this out more and really um getting granular more granular about what that efficiency looks like, how do we h how like what does the plan to sort of get buy in from the community look like? Because that's the piece that I think is going to be kind of difficult. I don't fully know the answer to that yet, but I think that that's the next big like thing to figure out and it would need to be figured out this spring and it would start with what's on the agenda of our admin team about how can we now bring the community into this process to to hear its voice.

We would need I don't I don't know what that looks like yet, but it would have to look like something. It would be a priority for us. That's where we would start.

And it would probably start with getting more of these details so that we can present a strong case to them because at this point it's just ideas and sometimes feelings are stronger than ideas.

I mean I want to return to the original point that um my intention actually was not to ne was to sort of let the scenarios speak for themselves. U it is no skin off my nose. what what you decide to do. I mean, it's your district. Um, but I felt a responsibility to have you hear what people are talking about and what we see at this point as costs and benefits of these different scenarios and to see if you want to run with any of them. Um, I think what I'm kind of hearing and I have, well, I should stop. I'm hearing some people say they like the idea of figuring out more of what scenario two involves. Um, and we can do that. One piece that I I forget who it was who asked the question. It was about like the numbers.

Um, it's really hard to see very far because the kids haven't been born yet.

Um, especially with three with threey olds. Um it a lot of those three-year-olds who would have a you know an issue that we would be responsible for and develop an IEP for they're really little. The parents are they're just developing it. It's sort of like it's very foggy and I don't know that that will ever dramatically change.

Um, but I do think it's reasonable to conclude that if we have a facility and if we have services on on offer, people will access them now that aren't under the current CDS model. And that's work for us, but it's good for kids.

Um um so I've this is this is going to be maybe some questions and maybe just some thoughts from me as as the other um panel board rep um with Malik, but I I really struggle with a lot of this.

You you had mentioned that like you know you have two truths two two good things and um I do see the equity piece like like Malik had mentioned. Um I also do feel a lot of just being honest kind of protection of my own. Um you know as a kind of foundation on that I have a a second and third grader at Panel and they have more years at Panel and uh we we've really fallen in love with the school and and the staff that's there and and then the situation. But I I do I do also understand as I pull back of of a district-wide perspective. Um I I would say that there's a a couple kind of initial thoughts that come to my mind. One, um beyond the CDS transition, is there a reason that we have a rush for this?

Um is there a reason that we are trying to do this by call it uh fall 27? Um or is the CDS transition really our reason for that? I think others in the back row feel free to speak up. I think that that's the biggest factor that gives us a timeline. Will the world come to an end if we don't achieve that by fall of 2027? It won't. Um I do feel I I have to acknowledge we don't have a good solution for the three-year-olds.

And I don't think we will have a good solution for the three-year-olds without some kind of reconfiguration.

So if we go past that fall of 2027, we'll have responsibility for three-y olds and no really good way to do it. Sure, that makes sense.

So can can we do it? I mean, sure, we can make a million things work, but we would we would have a good way to do it.

Um, yeah, I think that's the honest answer.

So yeah, in thinking about that, um I know that I'm not the only one at Panel that has that connection to the school.

Um and I know that that's really really strong and really pervasive in in Panel.

Um so if this is something that we would end up going for, I think community input would be would be really necessary and I think community buyin would be honestly really hard. Um, not that I'm opposed to change, uh, but just just being honest with that that that is if if that's something that has kind of glossed over in your mind, it is not something that has glossed over in Panel's resident's minds. Um, so I also was in just kind of thinking about a couple different scenarios. Um, I know that Mor Street is potentially coming to the end of its life as a school. Um, it's an old school and so one of my questions is do we have the potential to because we need to maybe build this school there sometime in the future anyways build what we want instead of adapting what we have for um, you know, most of our most of our early childhood is is in Freeport. Um, so do we have a potential of of using that to reorganize that and make our childhood center actually there. Um because we're most likely going to have to put some investment into that school somehow soon.

I I guess I don't I think another piece that we haven't really talked about today which I think will inform kind of where we go is the idea of the facility study. Like what do we have? What is its best use? Um, what potential do we have at those places? I mean, there are some places where there is room, right? Like we added the portable for Laugh and Learn at Mass Landing. I mean, there's there's space in Powell. There's space in Durham. I would say the one place there is no space other than potentially adding like a level is at the Mor Street School from when we've looked in the past. like you could add maybe a second level of part of it like you can see it the flat roof which I think we have been told could add maybe four classrooms right which is not nothing um I don't know if it would meet the need but I don't know what the answer to that is like um I don't know how close to the end of its life more street is or if it's at the point where it just needs a major overhaul. I don't know if there's space. Um I know it's really tight on every angle at Mor Street um to to go out. So maybe you can go up. Um I I can't answer that in like any kind of justifiable detail at the moment, but I can tell you what it makes me think as I I hear the question.

The first is um More Street is an older building. It's still very functional. I I think probably I don't know how many years it has left. It's not collapsing.

Um but it's not unsafe. It's not collapsing, but it's it's not new.

It's not new. So I think that I think that question about at some point at at some point within you know an amount of time we can think about that building will probably either need to be renovated or replaced. I think that's legit to say. Um the other problem that that does not solve though is the inequity of pal as a small school in the district with larger schools. And I I have this is playing out in RSU40 where I just left where Friendship Village School has 65 kids and it's a dearly beloved school in a charming, you know, arts and crafts building from 1910 I think or something like that. And more street isn't that old.

No. And it people love it and for good reason. It's just that it costs a lot per student. And when you have class sizes at more street and mass landing that are approaching the upper limits of the policy and you don't have the flexibility to do that in a smaller school, it's an equity conversation.

And um that's a hard conversation, but it that would not solve that problem.

Yeah, it's um I've struggled for a long time on what this district could or should look like um for a variety of reasons. I love the panel school. Like I couldn't imagine closing the panel school. Um, I what I really like about this, and I'm I'm sure I'm eating these words someday, like I actually appreciate this early childhood mandate coming because that's really forced us to think about things differently and really creates an amazing opportunity, I think, for that school that, you know, keeping a school under a hundred or around a 100 kids.

Um, it it's I don't know how long it's financially viable to maintain that model. Um, but I love that this could really fully utilize that space in a way that seems like it aligns with what that building was originally meant as, right? Um, I I think about scenario three. Um, and I think about how small the bathrooms are in the panel and I'm like, I don't know, some sixth graders are pretty big. Um, I I just like things like that, right? Like it feels like it feels like a an elementary a small a small people school. I love this idea, but I totally understand the emotional connection to it, Chris. And I never want it to come across that I don't respect and fully fully empathize with that. Right. Um for me the the timing piece one I don't like having to do things twice. I'm already thinking about like if we're looking at this for the following year, do we need to rethink what we're looking at for next year so we're not reduplicating efforts?

Um, I don't even know if that's that's too far ahead of myself, but um, you know, if we know this is kind of a path we're going to go and we can work really hard to get some, you know, get that buy in and and really communicate the need and the benefits and acknowledge the real feelings about it. Um, I'd rather get it done sooner because those equity pieces that we're talking about all the way across don't get any better by waiting. Um, you know, we might be able to meet the need of three-year-olds sort of in an intermediate way to postpone for a year, but it might be a little illustrative for me to talk about an experience I had not last year but the year before in RSU3, which is very analogous to this. So RSU3 is interior Waldo County. It's where I was the principal of Mount View High School. And I don't know if any of you know where interior Waldo County is, but if you've been to the common if you've been to the common ground fair, you've been there. Okay? So it's it's that area. Um that district has 11 towns and it's the second largest geographic district in the state. It's a third the size of Rhode Island.

it is very small.

Cullen with words of truth always. Um so and the the towns are, you know, it's Thornike, Montville, Unity is the largest town. Um the big city the big city Monroe Brooks Liberty Waldo I'm missing some but it's very small towns and the configuration of that district when I was there which is not that long ago is that there was a big there still is a big brand new beautiful building called the complex and it houses Mount View Elementary, Mount View Middle and Mount View High School all in one big building and that building has 1100 kids in it and all sharing one really big cafeteria and trust me the scheduling of anything really revolves around when kids are in the cafeteria in that building. So that's where,00 of the district's roughly 1,400 kids go to school. The rest are in four little community schools that are elementary schools and that's um Monroe Elementary School, Troy Elementary School, um there's one in Brooks, the name of it escapes me, and um Walker School in Liberty. And what that district came up against was they did a facility study as I've proposed in next year's budget. And the facility study looks very deeply at every school's plant, physical plant, and the state of the infrastructure there, and the number of students there.

And it projects out here's what you'll need to do to maintain this building, and here's what it's costing you per pupil in that building. And the simple math is just that the smaller schools spend a lot more money per building, which has it has value. And it the district may decide that's a cost worth bearing for very legitimate reasons.

Where they came up against it is in Walker especially the boiler was about to go and the question was in this building that was built in 1903.

It's a beautiful building right in downtown Liberty. Do we replace the boiler now or is that throwing good money after bad because the rest of it's like an old car eventually. So they had discussions about closing two of the four little schools because there was plenty more room in the complex for those kids to come. But that's a hard decision to make. And they did close two of those schools just this last year.

They closed Walker School in Liberty and they closed um the school in Brooks.

Both of which had they they just weren't sustainable they were going and now the town of Liberty is vote very well might decide to secede from the district. So these things are playing out across the state and the reasons why people would want to keep their community small schools are totally valid. They just come up against what it costs to do it.

So, so to be very clear, we are not contemplating closing panel. We are contemplating repurposing panel. Right. So, it it's very different in that in in I I appreciate the the the analogy. Um but it is quite different in the sense that there will still be a small school with a similar number of students.

Yeah. And it would be, you know, it would be Powell's kids.

Right. Right. But the but the but the per student cost would be very similar to what the per student cost at Panel is right now.

It's just that that's the case. We haven't we haven't studied. Of course.

Um that's what the facility study would probably help us understand.

Yeah. So I would appreciate um I'd love to see kind of our thoughts on on just how different that cost is.

Yeah.

And that be reflected in how the communities bear different cost. I I I forgot what it's called exactly, but cost sharing cost sharing um as well because that that's also part of the question. Yeah.

Um when it when it comes to those kind of costs, um I appreciate all the effort that's gone into this. It's really um helpful, especially the way that my brain works is um trying to hold a more sustainable picture at the same time that we're having the budget conversations that we're having. So, this has been really helpful to me to kind of um hold some of those choice points, I guess, with more um long-term vision. And um my my perspective is I like option two as well and think that we should investigate that. Um and I say that with also like respect and compassion for the feelings that would come with what that would mean for um different different places and different schools. But my reasoning for that is that I feel like if we keep the status quo, we sort of like hold on to these small beloved experiences and the inequities continue to grow across the schools. Um, and it's going to the way that it ties to the budget for me is I think that that's what we've been experiencing these last two years is we're trying to make we're trying to hold on to these special experiences and it comes at great cost.

um you have to like trade essentially, you have to like have tradeoffs um if you want to keep something exactly the way that it is on a small scale. And so not only would we gain e equity um in the actual educational experience of all of our students, I kind of view it as it shifts the inequities to geographical travel, which is very different than inequities in educational experience.

um and uh all towns and all schools have some benefit and also are experiencing some inequity in the geography right so um even Freeport which doesn't exist right now um and so I think it's it's a leveler playing field um with how the inequity exists um and how it gets spread out across the district So that's my two cents.

Um I also really like scenario 2. I think one of the things I get most excited about and thinking about it, it sounds like a lot of people are here is um in the early childhood center.

And the fact that with if we did something like this, we could actually think about full day prek is huge for working parents. Um and game changer really. Um, and also I think we keep talking about, oh, everchanging world, AI, what's going to happen, what better place to invest than an early childhood. Um, because the sooner we get kids to school and we're talking about having an outdoor environment for them, play-based, it just it really strikes a chord with me.

So, uh, I'm hearing general consensus for option two.

Um, does anyone feel very strongly that they want more deep dive into option three?

Lois, so I'm not so I'm not sure if I understood the cost analysis yet. Did you say that there hasn't been one done or There hasn't been one yet. Okay. So, so I guess I I am open to change. I'm good with that because I've thought that for years that there needed to be something done differently. But I had never thought about Will's idea of putting sixth grade at panel.

And I'm curious if you even have a sense of what the changes and costs would be to bring all the necessary academic and specialists and everybody into panel as opposed to bringing the special ed department and everybody in. if it's a childhood center, an early childhood center, we haven't fleshed that out. Um, and that's part of we we don't necessarily want to invest all that time and energy and if it's something the board just doesn't even like the concept of. So, what I think I can tell you fairly is that just as we've talked about it and definitely more than on the back of an envelope, we've had rich conversation about it, but not a lot of research into it yet.

The sixth grade option doesn't feel as viable. Um, feels like a cool idea, but when you think about all of the things we need to do to make it actually work, it just doesn't feel as if it works that well. Um, early childhood feels like it could work very well.

Yeah. Just one of the things that struck me as I was thinking about is all the experiences, the extracurriculars, the clubs, the sports that the sixth graders currently engage in at the current schools would be, I think, far more difficult to recreate if you had sixth grade off by itself. you know, they wouldn't it wouldn't be as easy for them to come over to FMS to join the after school club or, you know, it would just be an extra step. It'd be a little more difficult. Yeah.

Yeah. I mean, having not looked at the numbers, kind of just sort of visualizing it in my head and what would be required to your point to run all of those things because we'd still have to have special ed at the sixth grade, right? Like there's still kids in sixth grade who need special ed services and you know and the specialists and you know unless there's a way to run the program in such a way that the teachers are incorporating art and music and and all those things without having the I the you know right I I feel like that one I I like the the cool idea of it.

Right. I was telling Tom, I listened to a podcast about like how sixth graders brains are like crazy and you know sitting in class is really hard and you know outdoor time and you know maybe throw them on a farm for a year is a better idea. Um which I'm not saying pound is a farm.

Yeah, I know. They could grow things. We could sell it. It'd be great. Erica could cook it in the other schools. It'd be great. Um nobody wants to eat that. um you know like I like the idea of the experiential learning piece of it. I just think, you know, when we look at the components we're trying to solve for, right? Um, equity is one. I think it does create sort of a cool bringing together at that time. I don't think it solves for um early childhood. And honestly, I don't think it's necessarily a a benefit to that program in the financial stability.

You know, sort of we're looking at those three things we're trying to solve for it. I think it does one kind of well and in a really cool way, but maybe not the other two as well. Um, so for for me it's two. Valerie, another thing I would like I know that we it was briefly mentioned that we were going to bring in Peter Wagner potentially to look at community services and what they could do at Panel. I also wonder if if that would be incorporated more with if we went with that model, we would also be transitioning those sixth graders back to MLS and current state is that um extracurriculars are handled at the middle school for those people. And so those students would now need extracurricular offerings at Mass Landing, which many of them truncate at fifth grade. So we would need to think about what is age appropriate um extracurriculars offerings that would then be pushed back to our elementary education level for for not mass not just mass landing but also the panel students metriculating at DCS as well.

Do I know I know in Durham the sixth graders can only part like sports they can only participate if there's not enough seventh and eighth graders to make a team so they can like fill the team. I don't know how that works at FMS. Is it the same?

It's the same but they do quite a few sixth graders do get to participate. Yeah. Okay.

And there's numerous clubs and drama. Um I know that many of our sixth graders were in the drama production this year.

So just a lot of things that right we don't want to create a gap. Exactly.

Call.

Yeah. I think I think two things just to Chris's earlier point about the sort of the the fall 27 rush. I think just as I was reflecting on that I think I think it does just go to for me to the um to the equity piece. Like if we if we're trying to achieve equity let's try to achieve it as quick as we can. Just just on that. I think that was where my enthusiasm was coming from. I think also if like if we're if we're truthtelling um I'm realizing as we're talking about this that since I joined the board um one of the sort of the whisperings um that happens off sort of offline um has been about whether or not um the panel school will be able to be kept um because of the the cost per pupil question. Um and that has been that has been in the community and that has been something that has been has been talked about. Again, it's not something that we have talked about directly in this room.

Um but it is something talked about and I think what I'm experiencing um and maybe it's what's sort of balancing a little of my um uh sort of balancing something a little bit me. I'm like I think I'm sort of thrilled at the idea that we could keep the panel school. It wouldn't be keeping the panel school as what it is, but it would be integrating that school and all of and a lot of what makes it such an amazing school, integrating we'd be able to maintain that and integrate that into the the district. So, I think there was like a little part of me that was like kind of like a sigh of relief. um that that that again that sort of more whispered um uh question that goes to all of your sort of the the small schools um that that that shifts. So I think I'll just I'll just again own that knowing that again that change would be really hard and we need to have really hard conversations with folks and it's not um just a it's not just a rational question. It's really thinking about the whole mix of it. But um again, I just think we really owe it we owe it to our kids to to look really seriously um at that second option.

A and as someone whose kids went all the way through um from Durham and kindergarten up through all the way through Freeport High School for one um I can say that the Durham school is absolutely incredible. The staff they have is there is incredible. they would meld with the with you know the the panels um staff and and kids um and they wouldn't they would be changing it would be different but I don't think they would be losing they would you know they would be going to a great place it's it's not you know a a step back right we're not we're not bringing it down um which I think is is huge um and for me my my goal is is the same as as Collins um around the sooner we can get to the equity the better. Um I love the Durham school. I I have looked at the sort of disparities in the middle school not necessarily from an educational perspective but more from an opportunity perspective and I was kind of sad for my kids that they didn't have some of those opportunities and mine are gone or through the middle school years anyway. So, um, so I I would love for more kids to have those opportunities, um, because they're incredible and and the sooner we can give that to them, in my mind, if we can do it in a thoughtful way that makes sense, I am on board.

Okay. I I feel that I have to just I have to thank the team back there because this I mean I'm the one delivering this proposal but this is really coming about because some very very smart people who are very thoughtful have been thinking about this for a long time and this conversation was already somewhat framed by the time I got here and what I have found is that when it comes to both this proposal but also just the other side of this which is just next year's budget that dovetales with this.

The amount of thought and consideration and pouring over data and considering every contingency that has happened on that team is staggering. Um, so I just I I want to take a moment to really recognize that because, you know, we we're talking about lots of very complex things and the board has really good great questions about all of them and um I'm, you know, more than happy to continue to come back with answers to those questions, but I need you to know they things are being talked about and considered very thoughtfully by the team back there and they really know what they're So, here we go. I feel like Lois has a question. Yes. Microphone.

A loud voice. So, I don't usually use a microphone.

Um I so some of you know that I was a teacher at Mass Landing School and at Mor Street for a while for before we had Mass Landing for 26 years. So I need to just ask this question perhaps of your team perhaps of you. Have staff been clued into this discussion at all?

Okay, thank you.

Yeah, so that is I mean that is a part of the buyin process, right? It's not just community members, it's also the staff and what does that look like and what supports do they need? And you know, it's not time to take it to the staff until the board decides they even want this to go. Now that I'm hearing a consensus okay so am I hearing moving forward with more uh research and d deep diving into option two just on that I think again it really would be helpful to as as much as as possible without undue um labor to like have that be against the benchmark of the like the not really status quo. Um because I think that's that's I think um it's not that like uh I mean option two has a lot going for it just on its own but it's also contextual within the other options. Um, and I think particularly around cost, I think if we can um if we can get some of that and if that starts to to look like um it seems like what it would look like um it seems again it just provides a a lot a lot of um a lot more support for that. I think I I have some really good marching orders and I don't know what the next steps look like yet, but we'll have to like we're going to have to huddle and think of that, but we'll we'll I will bring you the thinking as it as it manifests over the next couple of months.

Okay.

All right. Um what' you say? It dovetailed into the budget. Here you go.

12 A2 review of the superintendent's proposed budget.

Is this you? Well, it's me, but I think that it's more discussion. Um, so at this point, I don't have another presentation for you.

I have shared the three tiers that you asked for. I've explained um the reductions that you've seen are I do think this is an important framing.

Those are the least what we that's not the royal we that really is the Wii in the room. What we consider to be the least disruptive way to get to each level.

So, and again that I think that theme that you saw in the last slideshow of tensions and trade-offs every they're all choices that are a trade-off and our intention has been to look at the entire situation holistically and think about what is most important to preserve and where we where we keep the best. Um, so I think that's the framing that that is most important for me to stress to you. And now is the time for me to try to answer questions or give you the opportunity to discuss.

I think we do have some new information from what we had last time. I see Kelly getting up.

So, I just want to mention that the packets included with um in your purple folders and that are out for the public and are also posted on the website. Um there was there's a couple of updates.

One of which is that we got um informed by region 10. uh they're still in their budget process, but their finance committee um moved forward with um presenting a proposal um to the full board on February 23rd, which involves a 9.63% increase in our um annual assessment from region 10. So on page uh six in your packet um the fourth item down says CTE region 10 that had previously said zero because we didn't know and we had just built it in as a flat um rate. So we've added $29,637 for the region 10 um contribution. And then if you look over to page seven, that ultimately puts us um year-over-year up 2,9001,512, which represents a 6.53% year-over-year expenditure increase.

The other um place that you will see that is on page eight. I have updated article three because that is where we actually have um appropriate the funds for region 10. Um, and then it and then it updated the bottom line there.

And then the other important piece that's in your packet this time, um, because we did get the ED279s, um, and we had talked about it at the last meeting, but I hadn't had a chance to touch base with the superintendent and the team about that. Um, the, uh, first round of proposed tax impact um, is in your packet. It is based off of the superintendent's recommended tier 2.

It's not like we see what tier one looks like and we see a tier three. What what's in your packet is representative of the uh reductions which are included in tier one and tier two because that's what the superintendent was recommending.

So just some uh if we can kind of walk through it a little bit. The year-over-year number which we just talked about rep uh is that 6.53% again that's just expenses year-over-year the total. Um, and then we start kind of going down through the shared revenues.

There are a few changes there because we've joined cohort 3. We will no longer be including um some of the expenses within the budget. Um, but we are will also not be billing CDS for the services that we are currently providing to these four-year-olds. Right now the model is um a portion of the the staff members time that is actually attributed to the the CDS four year olds that we're serving within our prek program currently we can turn around and um submit for reimbursement through a billing option. Um and so that previously we had been collecting about $79,000 a year. um and that we will not be billing for that because again the model is is quote unquote fully funded.

Um and we that money is going to operate outside of the budget. Now um the other the the other change is we used to um budget for half of an employee that we supposedly shared with the town of Freeport. We were doing this when I was here before the position never got filled. So I took the expense out and I took the revenue out. So they're a net zero. But why continue to put a expense in and a revenue in for something that hasn't come to fruition in 15 years. So that has been removed. But so with that said, if we just kind of go back up to the shared revenues, they're down about 159,000 160,000 based upon those two items.

um the shared state aid that is the the portion of subsidy that we get for belonging to GSEA the Greater Sebago Education Alliance.

Um and then if you go down to that next box there where we have Durham Freeport and Panel that's the amount of subsidy that each community is actually in fact receiving through the ED279.

So, if you um take the total increase of $815,513 and you net a slight reduction of $600 for the um the um regional service center contribution, that's you'll see that's the amount that our subsidy went up. So, about $814, a little over eight about 815,000.

Um but with that said um we all know that in or you have to give money in order to get money according to the uh 8279. So there is a local required contribution um and that is based upon valuation and the mill rate set by the state um the state and so that you can see the math there regarding each community that's up about $353,2 or $3. Um, so if we take um the total operating expenses, subtract out any shared revenues, any state aid, the amount that Durham keeps for their local portion of the debt for the Durham Community School, and the amount of require local required contribution in order to get the sub subsidy. That leaves you line E, which is that $17 million number. That's the additional local monies that actually get pushed through the cost sharing formula which was set up forth in our agreement. Um and that breakdown is um just below that where it says additional local money is required. It multiplies the amount. It takes that 17 million multiplies it by the percentage applicable to each town to actually get what the additional local monies required are.

With all of that said, if you turn to page 10, it then summarizes it by community to arrive at what the taxable the tax impact is to each community. So the model actually here it does show it takes your state valuation shows you the mill rate in order to get your required local amount that we saw um on the previous page and then it adds in the additional local monies that were required which is using that um formula of of cost sharing for Durham. It adds the local debt in because they as part of that uh regional agreement um they agreed to keep that debt which should be retiring in a couple years by the way.

Um and then the amount of state aid. So if you take that the total DURM is responsible for is that 13,744.

But if you remove the amount of state aid because that's actually the revenue portion, the taxable valuation uh the taxable amount um to Durham brings you to 7 um 752788.

Um I'm not going to explain it all for Freeport um again, but Freeport I will just read it out loud. It brings Freeport to 25,646 259 and it brings panel to 4,44825. We'll just move out to the next column.

The difference is the amount of taxation last year compared to the amount of taxation needed this year.

And then the line below the difference column that you see for each community, I reached out to um each town to get their um mill rates for the 2526 year because as we all know taxes are set as of April 1 of the valuations are set as of April 1 of each year. Um and those are set by the communities themselves and then the assessments for taxes are actually done by each community. We to the individual taxpayers. We tax the town when we when you guys in June when the the uh budget gets approved, you sign tax assessment warrants and what we're doing is we're turning those over to the treasurer of the communities and they are then adding that in to your total tax bill. There's three components to your tax bill. the education component, the county component, and your municipal component.

Um, so we only when we are looking at these numbers, while I'm looking at the total mill rate and total valuation, what we need to remember is that for Durham, it's a $169 on last year's mill rate. And um that represents about five a 5.4% 4% increase for the education portion of the tax bill only. Um there will also still be community taxes that the towns will have to consider and any municipal increases that the towns are considering on their own. So just to run down through there for Durm it's about um 5.4% increase on taxation for I'm sorry 5.04 5.04 04 sorry um point counts 3.51 and then for panel it's 5.27 and again these are all based upon all of the recommended reductions in level one and level two that the superintendent um is proposing to the board.

So those are the ads that I have. Um, and with that, unless there are questions about this, I will go sit back down because I know there's other presentations.

Questions for Kelly? Thank you, Chris. Oh, Chris.

Oh, sorry. Um, so just to wrap my head around it, uh, the the percentage numbers for the towns are lower than the the total 6.53. That's because the state um it's because we're looking at it relative to your mill rate which is your assessed valuation.

Yeah. And that includes your municipal budget and your county budget. So the we're saying our school budget expenditure to expenditure is 6.53.

Right.

But when we roll that through with the that's because our state our state allocation went up, right?

Well, that's part of it. But it could also be even if our state subsidy didn't go up, the percentage could be less or more based on the valuation the state gives us um and how much we have to raise with the required state mill rate.

And then because we're comparing the increase needed to cover the educational portion of your tax increase, but we're the denominator.

Yes. Is uh is your total tax rate inclusive of your whole tax bill. Okay. Not just the education piece.

How'd I do? Did great.

Um I had a question. No, I forgot what it was. Oh, uh I remember um we c sort of flew through the shared revenue piece. Um the undesated fund balance usage is a very specific number. I assume that's made up of components.

So the undesated uh fund balance piece um is reflective of step I would say phase two of the vehicle and energy audit replacement plan that the board discussed last year. Um we had talked about utilizing undesated fund balance to so incrementally step into um kind of a leveled amount of taxation impact. And so um we have we we typically carry about 900,000 running through there. And so this this year part of that plan because prices came in on the energy audit a little lower than what we needed u than what we had anticipated the amount uh the additional 219,978 um represents phase two of that incremental step in to the vehicle replace vehicle and equipment replacement plan and the energy audit that we're working on. Thank you.

Um, and just for newer members of the board, what that undesated fund balance represents is essentially the savings account that we have over the years when we we make estimates, right, on what it's going to cost for teachers and staff and and supplies. And I mean obviously the teachers and the staff are we're pretty locked in on because we know we have a contract but we could have someone who leaves at the top of the scale and replace them with someone who is fresh out of college so there might be savings there or vice versa. Um so you know what actually comes in terms of you know expenditures we can't we can't pay out more than we approve in the prior year but if it comes in that there you know we didn't spend everything we allocated it essentially rolls into that undesated fund balance.

Um so sort of tax dollars we have collected but not needed to spend in that year and that's over you know the whole life of the RSU that those are built. Um, and then so this undesated fund balance basically allows us to offset some of the so we don't have to collect every dollar of the 47269441 we're hoping to spend next year. We're saying well we're going to we're going to use a million dollars that we've already collected from the taxpayers to bring down how much we need to collect.

If that makes sense.

Lois like a minimum. Yeah.

So, so it's uh it it varies. Uh it's depended year to year. Like in COVID years, it went way up because we got funds in from the state. Um the state actually sets a maximum that they'd like you to keep. Like they won't they don't want you to keep more than 5% of your again nine again. it it it the legislature moved it back to nine and it's actually over a three-year period.

So the the average is it's 9% over three years. So if so say if you're above the the 9% threshold but you actually have a plan for use which is what we're doing here or in the past two years we've also add to to the capital reserve capital reserve accounts with the undesated plus we um established article reserves with the undesated accounts. um those actually are like planned uses of it. So would reduce that percent because right right now you're audit like we audit on June on June 30, right? Which by the way we should be getting that next week. I'm so excited about that. Um for last year so we can actually get our our definite number. Um but basically when as part of that audit process she'll um they will ultimately land at a number but one of the questions that um the auditor asks me is what have you committed right and because we've committed in this this year to use that 1 million88 so that subtracts out of that overall savings account that I have and then anything that I um the board voted to utilize for article reserves reserves or capital reserves, those are also considered committed. And so those would come out and then they assess whether or not you're under or over that 9% threshold.

So it's varied over time. It was as low as 3% during COVID. People I mean people weren't spending money because they were afraid of what was going to happen and then we were getting funds. So it was way up. So they bumped it up to 9%. They brought it back down to 5%. Apparently they're back up to 9% again. They were proposing to come back down but Oh, they didn't they didn't like because it was a a phase down approach.

Okay. Um but they did not phase down to that. They let they changed it.

So as a board we haven't we haven't had a target number as the finance committee to say like we think we should keep this much in there. Um, I think Kelly has done a great time, great job in her previous time and her current time back here in the district helping us be thoughtful in the use of undesated fund balance. Right. We don't want to, you know, uh, uh, bring it all the way down.

We we try not to use um there's kind of a chunk that rolls through each year because we don't want to run run up against not being able to to pay everything we want to pay during the year that we've we've thought if things come in a little bit more expensive. Um so we want to make sure that we're we're collecting enough so there's always a little bit more and we try to put that back through through this undesated fund balance, right? Um, but we don't want to spend sort of rainy day savings on ongoing operational things, right? like we might move it into the capital reserve to say like you know if something if a roof goes or a septic system perhaps somewhere um we would have funds allocated for that and we might access that for um you know a one-time use as opposed to using it to fund operational like positions etc into the future which are ongoing uses with a one-time funding source um because then we just create as Kelly would call it a financial cliff. Um and and the other thing which you'll hear about at the next meeting is the our um instead of building a contingency within the budget itself for those kind of emergencies, what we've done as a district is create the capital reserve. So we have um a true capital reserve, we have a tennis court reserve, we have a track and field reserve account, we have a fuel reserve account which we have not touched since its establishment. Um but then we also created what we called article reserves and it was a way to be prepared for emergency situations um and have authority to spend money with board approval um but not tax taxpayers for it. And a perfect example of um this is a special education student moves in that requires a service uh a speech language service or and our our um our specialists are at capacity.

We could potentially use that money to either one hire staff with board approval or two to use a contracted service provider um to get us by um for until the next budget year. So, what we've kind of done as a board or the board kind of agreed to when I proposed the article reserves is that they're kind of a one-time funding source for emergencies. So, if the emergency still exists come the next budget cycle, we would then add that position into the budget.

It also helps us address those kind of like one-year fluctuations where sometimes you might need a grade four teacher, but we can't loop somebody up because now grade three, you know, the grade three is big, the grade, you know, three moving to four is big, but two moving to three is big. So, you need to keep that teacher. It it allows us to address that, but then you know that the smaller class coming up might potentially be a little lower and you could like it it just helps us budget better and not tax for kind of one year only positions or and if it if it's tried and true and it's going to stay, then we're going to commit to putting it in the budget.

So, it's using our savings account for that. Yeah. Kelly, do you remember your comment? Sorry.

Yeah, but I guess one thing point to bring up is sort of do we have sort of a policy for how much we decide to take from undesated funds to offset our taxation? I'm sure it just depends on how much we have in there and what we have sort of to use it on in other areas. But so the largest part of the one thing I will say is no, we don't have a policy. So, regarding that, but what I will say, and I'll I'll get on my um financial close soap box that Michelle's talking about, um is the majority of our budget, right, are staff and personnel, and they're going to the need is typically going to continue for those staff and personnel. So, if you are quote unquote buying down the tax rate by utilizing your undesated fund balance and you do that in one year and you don't add back to that savings account, you don't necessarily have it the next year to use. So, you then create a financial cliff, right, where you don't have the revenue, so it automatically has to go to taxation. Um, and I think one of the things we've learned as a board is is our annual rollover number for our staff is the largest driver of our annual increases.

Rightfully so, we need to pay our employees. We need to pay them well because that we expect high quality employees and that's what we aim to hire. Um, and but as a result of doing that, that is the largest driver of your budget. And so I often advise against um utilizing undesated fund balance to pay for salaries that are going to then be needed again. So like I said, the typical number is that 900,000 Kelly um that was rolling through. Um that increased over the time that I left um but it was it that's where it was when I got back. Um but now what we've been doing is we've stayed relatively flat with that because we feel like we can support that number. But the the uses that we're now moving forward with are to level off for so for the energy audit for example and the um the vehicle and equipment replacement.

We're um those the energy audit is is a 17-year lease, but much like we did when we took on the debt service for the renovation of the high school, we used undesated fund balance over a 4-year period to actually incrementally push it on to the taxpayers. So, it was a million dollars, right? And instead of saying in one year we need to raise a million dollars because we're adding this debt service on. The first year I used 750 in tax um in in the savings account and put $250 on the taxpayer.

The next year we used 500 and then it was 500 on the taxpayer. Then we went to 250. 750 was in the taxes and then we used done and then there was a million.

So, it it's it's that way to not spike your budget for expenditures, which is exactly why we used it for the vehicle and equipment replacement and the energy audit, so that we could get those done without spikes in taxation to help with the inflationary environment we're in, but yet um not create any sort of cliff.

Care I have a question that connects the talk of this budget year um to Tom's earlier presentation where you mentioned a secondary consideration um financial sustainability in an inflationary environment. And I'm wondering if you could just talk more about what an inflationary environment means if you're talking about more than just inflation. Does that does it mean more than that? To me, it it means at the surface level what we're paying for the things we buy, literally, whether it's oil, curriculum, materials, whatever. But it's also to return to Kelly's main point. It's to keep our salaries competitive, living in an area where a our people deserve to be paid well, and also if they're not, they'll go down the road where they will be paid well. And that's That's just a fact that we that we live with.

It's driving up the cost of living for everybody. And it means that we have to make sure our employee employees have a wage that they deserve.

just um just because as uh as Kelly mentioned, we have the information now from um of what the the region 10 finance committee is proposing to bring to the full uh region 10 board. Um I just wanted to kind of provide a little a few notes on that. I'm I'm on the finance committee for region 10.

I think a couple of things. First just to note that um uh that uh region 10 is facing the same inflationary environment uh that we are.

Um also uh some of the increase that we see um here uh is due to the fact that is due to the contracts that we have signed. Um because region 10 um uh averages the three sending districts um in terms of their in terms of their salaries. Um so we are the decisions we make uh in terms of our employees impact that number. I also just want to just provide a few details on um we like uh uh Tom you did for us. Um uh director superintendent Shabbat uh gave the finance committee three um three budgets to sort of to look at and including the impact of that. um the sort of the um the uh the least change um at region 10 um was going to result uh north of a 14.75 um increase and that was um only with the reduction of a 1.5 um edtech um and a.5 uh EMT teacher. Um so that would have that was that was that was the um the least impact to uh educational environment the greatest impact in terms of the uh percentages um the scenario that we ended up uh recommending um adds uh adds a number of cuts to that. So I just want to sort of like again just to make clear that we we that this is as we are doing here they are doing there um in terms of really looking hard at this and I really want to um applaud um director superintendent Shabbad and his team for like really looking hard at this. Um so there's you know we we would be if we move forward with this it would be um cutting tuition for teacher support um teacher PD admin PD software um advertising so we would not be advertise the not be advertising the same as we would general supplies um instructional supplies and books and periodicals. So just again just to make clear that the um what we're balancing and also just in transparency um the the um the least impact of taxation um would have been a third uh that would have um uh required the cutting of the JMG program there. Um and I will just own that that was a that was a a bridge too far for me. I wasn't comfortable um at all with that. In addition, they would be cutting all of their field trips um and also uh student assessment. So again, that was just um so again, I just wanted to share those details to say that yes, uh we're um I think that percentage is a little higher um than we uh perhaps as a board would be would have been looking for um on the RSU5 side, but just to explain where that's coming from. And again, that hasn't been approved, but that uh is what we're going to be presenting.

And um I always like to point out particularly as it relates to the region 10 side and how their funding works, right? So in our budget we have a line item of about 300 or 330 now is what's um proposed. So that it it's not insignificant, but so it's uh we are only paying that 9% increase on our contribution to to region 10. So that's about $29,000. That's the increase um for for for all the students that are attending region 10. Um the state funds the CTE directly similar to how we get subsidy they get direct funds from from the state and then um if the programs uh that they're running have a cost very similar to how we have you know shared um uh uh additional local monies in our budget. um if they have additional local monies in theirs that gets split up between the three sending districts based on the number of students each district sends as a percentage of the whole. So we used to send far more money to um to region 10 but we also got more money from the state for those kids. Now they send it directly to region 10 and we just fund sort of that delta.

Yeah. Just also on that just for context, the um proposed the the total proposed budget for region 10 um with this scenario would be 4.7 million um in comparison with our uh more than that times 10.

It's my thing. Other questions?

Did we have other information requests from you that you had brought?

There were some information requests at the end of the last meeting and I I can uh there are a few things I want to create further context around that are important just in the whole scheme of things. One was about you had a presentation from Pam and Bill about the middle school schedule and the new concept for that. And then there's there are naturally questions about that. So um we're prepared to talk in a little more detail about that.

Um obviously what's difficult there are a number of things that are difficult to think about but the what it does for world language is particularly difficult. So, I think an angle that we haven't discussed this from yet, it's an overall lens is that Freeport Middle School um does something that I don't know of another middle school that does, which is that it offers STEM as a core class. when you offer STEM as a core and that's wonderful and one of the thing the lessons that um the team learned I mean I wasn't here but from last year's discussion is that STEM is very important there so for from the get-go the assumption was that should be preserved but when you consider we've been talking about money but actually the I what I would say the um greatest resource in schools is is time educational minutes in the day.

When you add in an additional core class into a school day that has a finite number of minutes, it means that the other side of that, which is the the unified arts classes, the specials, there's less time to divvy up among those. And so that's a constraint that figures into the entire picture.

So, um that is part of why it's hard to um figure a way to provide world language to every kid with two choices of world language.

Um, some of the data that we can talk about more fully is that and Pam and Bill can probably do this well can definitely do it more granularly than I can but we've taken a look at under the existing model how many of our kids are getting a world language at all. And there's a substantial number of our kids who as we currently have this set up aren't getting any world language at all until they get to high school. Um, while the proposal that's on the table to consolidate with just Spanish looks like a retraction, it in fact gets more kids to have world language by the time they get to the high school by a lot. It's like the difference between roughly 60% and roughly 90% of kids getting to high school with some exposure to world language.

Um and then you know I wasn't in a position to sort of say this last week because I had hadn't given this week's presentation but if we now look ahead to the possibility of consolidated middle schools that means bringing um Spanish from Durham into a consolidated middle school and having double the number of Spanish teachers there which really means it could be much more robust. So, there were were just some aspects of that that had not fully come out last week. Um, I see Valerie, your hand is up.

Thanks. Sorry. Yeah. About the Spanish teacher, I just had um a question about students for whom I know we have a few uh that Spanish is actually their first language. Do we have a plan for those students? Haven't thought of that angle yet.

That's a good point. They're gonna rock that class. They're gonna rock.

We did uh I also did a look today at there was a question about I think it was your question Colin about um the impact of kids uh in the high school and what what you know how it would impact kids going forward to the high school. So, what I found, and I do have I could open the laptop and give you the numbers, but most by far the most kids who take either French or Spanish at Freeport Middle School, I don't have this data for Durham yet, but we're talking about Freeport Middle School. Most of them do not go on to level two in nth grade in either of those languages. Actually, what the data shows is that the greatest block of kids goes to Latin in ninth grade. And the next greatest block goes to year one in the language that they took. And then there's literally, I think, one kid per year who crosses over and decides, nope, I'm taking Spanish now or I'm taking French now and makes a switch.

That data does not suggest that um making the change we've proposed would dramatically harm a French program at the high school.

There's some more details about the SK.

I don't know if you want to come on down, Pam and Bill, but um there are there was a there had been thought already given to how to make a plan work for Spanish next year based on the level of staffing we have for Spanish, which is a 6 position. That's a point that has been considered just didn't get talked about last week.

Yeah, I mean well said Tommy. You kind of covered uh speaking a little bit about the data on the program at the middle school and the high school. Um we do have just the 6 position. Um uh the point6 Spanish works um with us being really mindful on constraints and being creative with the time. For example, relieving additional instructional and teacher responsibilities for that 6 educator um taking away things like BCS responsibilities, advisories or duties.

uh with this model of the 6 foreign language teacher um although we recognize it's going to impact seventh grade because they will not be able to access a foreign language um it will be a little more robust for those eighth graders.

Just saying um it would be really ideal if we could make that 6 a full-time educator because then we'd be able to offer that in the seventh grade. So just some food for thought for that.

And so what I what I always come back to, I probably sound like a broken record. I just want to emphasize I don't think anybody here, certainly not me, feels that world language is unimportant. Um, if the overall context were different, this is not something we'd even be putting on the table. But when we looked at how do we get to the eight, seven, and six% tier that the board has asked for, our conversation was in each case, what's the least painful way overall to get to that level. And so that reduction feels like one we can manage in that way, right? And I certainly don't want it to come across um that we're slighting up the French program in any capacity. Um, so I just want to say that as well.

I would love to see us have world language all the way down to prek.

Um, we're not I not everybody agrees with me, but um, that's just that's a personal thing. We're just not there.

U, another area. Well, I don't know any more questions for Pam before I go on with the other questions that responding to questions from last week.

I just wanted to make sure I heard you right. So, if we have a full-time Spanish teacher, then seventh and eighth grade could all get Spanish.

Yeah, we could offer like an introduction to Spanish at the seventh grade level and then build upon that in a more robust for eighth grade and then when they have the options at the high school, I mean, certainly they can pick the French to Spanish or the Latin, but then they have that strong skill set.

Do you do you remember off the top of your head, Pam, or do you have it in front of you what was the the number of kids now who are getting a world language at all?

We have combined right now 55% of the kids um getting a foreign language at Freeport Middle School.

And what would it be if we made the change that we proposed?

uh we could I would say just throwing an estimated number out there probably like 85%. And I say that because what could be driven with some kids not taking a foreign lage might be um IEP accommodations. Um so that would make that number down a little bit in different interventions. So that's why I wouldn't say the 100% because there would be some circumstances um that but with the percentage would certainly go up.

Yeah, I guess I am intrigued about the idea of bumping that back up to one full-time employee and I'd like to see what that would do to our budget impact. It's been added to the list. Care.

Well, I'm guess I'm I'm curious how so right now we have 1.6 between French and Spanish.

and we're wanting to make a reduction somewhere.

Is there would there be any what would it look like to have 0.5 French and 0.5 Spanish?

Oh, we haven't I we could we could talk about that. We'd have to come back to you about what that would look like budgetarily, but also what it would look like logistically in the schedule. Right.

I just also want to name um that I did a little math. 33% of K through eight students are at Durham and there is no French at Durham. Right. So I just want to name that as well.

One thing I as I've sat with that for what 30 seconds Cara is it's hard to hire a halftime person and there are people out there who are certified in both Spanish and French. actually are. I know that the French teacher at the high school is one of them. I don't know if the French teacher at the middle school is one, but those people are kind of like unicorns. Um they're really otherwise you you're looking for a halftime of each and that's hard to find.

Colin.

Um, yeah. I mean, I think I think just on this point, um, again, knowing all of the knowing all of the pressures and appreciating all of the all of the work that, um, that you and Bill have done, particularly Pam, I think that I think I'll just own that. I think the the reduction of the world languages program is the is the aspect of the budget that is um of the proposal that is just like I just have the hardest time. um uh sitting with and I and I'll own that that is not uh that is not completely from that earlier rational self that I was that I was referencing. Um but uh I don't I don't know. I think um I don't really have much more to say about that right now. I think the I think the the idea that increasing to a one a full a full-time um for Spanish would allow for languages to be introduced in the seventh grade. I think that would be um I think that would be much much better.

Um I' I would I think I'd just say personally that the only language in the eighth grade just doesn't um doesn't sit well with me personally. And that's no um again that's no disrespect to the the complexity of everything that you all were doing. Um it's just that uh again for whatever that is worth um that's just the the the piece I can't quite um get with and this is probably an obvious no based on the discussion we had last year but you know to Tom's point about the STEM piece I mean is that something that's not even on the table for discussion that we would consider so you know I just want to bringing it back to the that's a whole it's a whole another thing. I mean that's essentially what creates this choice, right?

And and another aspect of it too. I was talking with a member of our team this morning or the or yesterday and you know I won't put that person's name on the table but there's also the issue of equity across the grades span and even with the reductions that are proposed the middle school have will have lower class sizes than the elementary schools do and when you have a hundred kids per grade and six specials and that means you end up with you PE classes with 13 kids in them. And that's very different when you go to the elementary schools. So that that's this I have to keep panning out to that big lens.

Um, another area I don't unless we want to talk about world language some more that there is rich discussion around is for ESOL.

Um, and that's a tough one too. Um, the number the numbers aren't tough. We have looked at for example what a schedule would look like with two teachers which is what I've proposed. Um it's a very workable schedule based on the numbers that we have. Um we would be well within the guidance that's supplied by the DOE if we were at that level. There actually is no statute that says what the level has to be either a state or federal statute. It's guidance from the DOE. And what I have worked with in previous districts where I was the over, you know, oversaw ESOL was similar configuration with multiple school buildings, a relatively low number of students who are identified as ML based on the overall district population.

We really need an itinerant model because we our people need to be able to go where the kids are. And right now the kids are in the high school, the middle school, more street and mass landing.

And um the building based model with three people is doing wonderful things, but it is more than we need in that area. And if I just pan back to again the big lens of everything else that we're trying to trade off to get to a a difficult place, that's where I have to make the recommendation to look at.

So, some of the um we've gotten a variety of of emails to the board. Um there the way I read some of them is that we would not be compliant, but what I hear you saying is that's not the case.

I would respectfully disagree with that statement. Okay.

Yeah, Steph, I'm gonna go back just I have a lingering thought that's rattling around around world language that I just want to say. I think that this is like a perfect micro example of what we're talking about and option two. We're gonna we're having to make a decision where we're losing something that feels really good and really robust and like really good to some students and we're doing it in service of a decision that feels more equitable to the district as a whole. And so I think it's important to just name that, right? And like and we're talking about it happening because of another inequity which is STEM which Durham also doesn't have. And so I think it's just important to name that it's like these types of decisions hurt because they mean you don't get all of the things that you love and used to have in order to move towards something that's more equitable for everyone. So I just want to say that.

But also going back to that when you were talking about Tom STEM and how there's six different things in UA, I know that there was a lot of discussion at the middle school level about the schedule. Was that a piece that seemed like that needed to change in terms the STEM piece in terms of the amount of offerings in United Arts, whether it's STEM or something else like consolidating some of them or switching it around? I mean, that wasn't really brought to us.

I don't think so. Pam, do you Because I think STEM is usually a special, right? It's usually, right? Well, in most places it's a special like in Durham it is a special. It's not a core class. It's there but not to the same degree, right? So there is STEM but it's like you know the frequency of music or or library or media I guess in the middle school. If I try to turn on my long-term lens, long-term not meaning 10 years from now, meaning two or three years from now, um I actually am really excited about the possibility of in a consolidated district middle school having a robust CTE program and STEM is really part of that. Um I think we have a lot of opportunity to be able to to build on that vision. So I think having this is just me personally um maybe others would agree or not but that if we can bring all kids into that and build on it from there that that's a fantastic starting place.

So I think a little while ago you mentioned that you wanted to consider in the future sometime embedding CTE at the middle school. Did I hear you say that with an embedded CTE teacher?

Can you tell me if there are other districts around that do that? Yes. Yes.

And is is it within region 10 or um I've actually talked to Sean Shabbat at region 10 about this idea.

Um it's entirely viable. They would supply the teacher. And just so that we know what CTE means because I don't want to presume everybody does. It's career and technical education.

It's both, you know, kind of like hands-on career technical skills that you might get in a maker space or and it's also often networking with community um community businesses and community artisans to bring them into the school to share their craft with kids. A place where I have seen that done. That's one it's just down the road from where I live in St. George. And that little school there has won national awards for their CTE program.

And it's from age three through grade 8.

And uh I have it I have a plan to actually bring a a team from our board members and administrators down out to visit that school to see it because they've also done early childhood there. They have the three-year-olds and foury olds in full day program. They were part of cohort one, I think.

And they've done a fantastic job. It would be really worth us looking at. Yeah.

Yeah. I forgot about that part. I when I saw that I thought that was very interesting.

Anna, I feel like I'm asking so many questions this meeting. Um what's happening? Uh is going back to ESOL.

Uh it can we see some outline of what those numbers look like with the reductions proposed?

Yeah, actually Erica has them.

Good evening, Erica Mo, assistant superintendent. So yeah, I think there were two sorts of requests, a proposed schedule and then some comparisons.

Yep. Which would you like first? Let's get the schedule. Okay.

Yeah, might want to movement break.

Okay. Um, I'm gonna make this bigger at the top and then I'll scroll down.

Oh, maybe not that big. Let me stretch it out. Okay. Um, let me stretch this out as well.

All right. So, you see a total count there in bold on column B at 43. I just want to call out that there was a student in the original account that I gave you last week who's not receiving services. So what um out of choice um what we um what has been calculated here um is our current case load that is being served and uh how we could operationalize with two staff members in our current case load. So, it's not speculating into next year as to like what our head, you know, our case load might be or what their levels are, where they fall, grade level or all of those things. Just kind of doing running the scenario with the headcount that we have right now um service uh in multilingual programs. So, at at Mor Street School, 13 kiddos, Masslanding 12, the middle school, Freeport Middle School four, and then uh Freeport High School 14. Right? So, if we had two teachers, we got teacher 1.0 and teacher 1.0 in column G over there. We've got them roughly on an AM and a PM schedule with roughly two groups at each each side of their day. um the duration that they sit with those groups can be elongated um according to needs and those needs the service needs are dictated by the level um where the student um the level of achievement the student has demonstrated on their most recent WEDA assessment which is the assessment we use we are we are required to apply annually for multilingual learners. So we gain a composite level and then we place our service um like um our our service design accordingly. There are other considerations um taken in to um uh to designing that where like what are the other services that the student has?

What is the least restrictive way to provide those services? Um what makes the sense best sense in their day? So, if we were to just put together preK and Kdos for a quantity of six total students and then another group first and second grade seven, those are very reasonable group sizes. Um, very reasonable group sizes. And then in the PM side, um, that same person could travel over to Mass Landing School and provide two groups services to two groups of six. And just to say that those groups could be depending on score, grade level, other cohort criteria like just depends on what we what we um you know where the needs land. Um so then kind of similarly for that other 2.0 or sorry other 1.0 no individual. Um, we would have like an AM schedule that actually has space for flexibility to service any needs that come up over the course of the year or perhaps land in a different building that isn't already articulated on this schedule. Um, and then we have a PM schedule as well, potentially at the high school, keeping in mind that all of these blocks are movable. This is just like a simple way of explaining. So the high school could potentially be in the morning and the middle school in the afternoon, but we would we would work with their schedules to, you know, provide um least disruptive uh services that are um meeting the meeting the state's requirements um which are outlined in this brief like little infographic. Um kids who fall in levels um one to it was being considered. We had to see how that would play out. Um and so um yeah we did we did that work uh based on this year's numbers and it's not all one to one no they can be absolutely it's probably better and I just I before I I don't want to not pause and recognize there's been a a mountain of work done coming into this year by this team. Um, we worked as you may recall on like the Lao plan, the ILAPS, the materials, the, you know, I'm I just like just making a list. Um, you know, all of the um translation, interpretation, the identific identification um sort of firming up like there was so much work done um coming into this year. Um, I'd say we're even better positioned at this point to ensure that the services are um sustainable with with this number of um staff servicing our needs.

Um, how does this change? I I know that you know we have 43 total students but the actual total number of students in the blocks is more than that right because some students are in more than one block.

Yeah. So a block isn't necessarily an hour. It's just um so if we think about how many hours a staff member typically um works in in in direct instruction, it's it's bas it's kind of hard to to draw it all out, but like an AM period and a PM period. So this would be enough time to do like the two block scenario or the one block scenario. Yeah.

And again, it's not it's not directly equivalent to an hour necessarily.

I appreciate this work and I also um I think this group more than any other group especially with the lack of influx of new students for a variety of reasons um are really kind of working toward their own obsolescence in a way that the rest of the teachers aren't. And I think the achievement that they've they've done in in lessening the students who have a lot of need is remarkable and worth louding. And I really I think one of the reasons that I think we're so reticent and sad that this this cut may be necessary is is that this hard work is kind of their undoing.

And I think that's why we're all so broken up about it.

Yeah. Um, in the realm of intervention work, we're always trying to work ourselves out of a job. Um, we're hoping that the needs become um smaller and smaller um fewer and fewer. the yeah our staff have done a tremendous job um ser serving students in this area of need and it evidence over the years is that more and more of our students if we look at this kind of pathway and the DOE document more and more of our students are in the green and blue zone than in the red and orange zone.

Um and we continue to like move kids along um towards exit which is that composite 4.5 score that we're shooting for.

So it is indeed the case that we're we're we own the reduced me and then I think there was also a request for comparison. Would you like me to share that?

Okay. Um, so I will, um, uh, I was able to toss out a survey statewide. So I was, I was also able to capture some of our traditional um, comparison districts that we have in our group. Um, there are a list of them.

I there are seven total in that group. I was able to gather feedback from four of those seven. So, you're going to see that in the data as well as some other statewide schools. The data are anonymized because of the sensitive nature of this cohort, these these um service areas. So, um okay. Um, so for all the districts who responded, you can see the cohort ones at the top. ABCD, that's just letters instead of numbers. Um, and RSU5 is us.

So, we've got RSU5 pulled out. And then you can see all other all the other responding districts down below our RSU5 um bar. So this is the multilingual population and the number of full-time equivalent English as um as an as a other language staff member. Right? So this is the comparison that I was able to gather.

Oh, sorry. I can go. Is it okay to move on or are we good? Okay. Um, next, the ESOL staff. Um, and then any additional considerations with, um, edtech um, staff positions, FTE in those comparisons.

This is multilingual students per staff member teacher because teachers it um edex cannot provide the direct service requirement they can do additional support this is current yes it's everybody's current it's worth noting that other districts are up against similar challenge challenges.

That's the the qualitative feedback uh is not coming through in these data because it's it's equally challenging for other districts.

And then just um this way of looking at things.

I'm happy to answer any questions you have.

So, so there's a district that has 52 to one.

I mean, to Tom's point, there isn't necessarily a um standard for the ratio. I get that.

One teacher for 52 kids. We don't want to be there. No, no, we don't want I I think the recommendation would be what are our typical class sizes and knowing that this is a this is a high needs you know group. So like what does that mean in terms of reasonable service?

But we don't have that specific guidance from the state.

Other questions on the ESOL?

any other questions that we had hoped to get answers to tonight.

There was one other sort of um grouping of questions for me around it at tier 2 what the impact of the reductions of the ad texts would be because most of the most of the reductions at tier 2 are ed general ed ad ed texts. So I wanted to share a little bit more about the reasoning of those um and it also dubtales with another angle which is um looking at administration as an area for potential reduction. So we have looked at I I didn't recommend any reductions in administration. We did talk about them. We did look at them. Um, at the central office level, RSU5 is actually pretty dramatically understaffed compared to most other districts in terms of the amount of clerical support that there is and also the number of administrative positions. Um, a good example is Brunswick has a chief academic officer in addition to an assistant superintendent.

Um, the reason these two topics come together and they came together when we discussed them is that the general ed edte I can't pretend we wouldn't feel an impact from losing those positions.

It's an impact that given every other possibility that we we tossed around seemed like the most manageable to get to the tier two. And the reason it's the most manageable is that we have recently added assistant principles in more street and mass landing.

And I don't know if you remember, Lois, you weren't on the board last fall when the um all the buildings shared out their attendance data. The attendance data is is overwhelmingly positive, a huge improvement. Um, and also adding those positions has enabled assistant principles to step in in behavioral situations, RTI A and B. It's enabled them to manage sometimes complex, you know, behavior situations at school that then require a complex parent interaction after school. Um there are needs that we still haven't that I feel we need to lean into assistant principles even further with 504 assistance and management.

Um and then another consideration is that you know we have five and a half open edtech positions in special ed where those people who are currently working in general ed wouldn't have to lose a job. we have a job open for them.

So, that's just some of the reasoning behind why um those were that's where we landed largely to get to to tier 2. Um again, I can't pretend it won't have an impact because a those ed techs are really good and having the extra person there, it definitely helps, but of all the other impacts we could choose from, it's one we felt we could manage the best. Thank you Chris.

Um so along that that ad tech theme um I think we had talked about it but trying to to understand if you if you had to let's say prioritize not cutting two of those edtech positions which would they be um one of the things I worry about is that yes I know we have special ed positions open um special ed tech positions open but that it's really a very different job and that we I I don't want to get our district into a situation where we we now have both open edtech positions, general ed tech and special ed tech positions um or open special ed tech special ed tech positions but we have lost some of those general ed tech positions. though.

So, just to I'm going to answer your question, but just to make it clear that's not we didn't discuss that scenario as a team. Like we did not of the edtech positions that are listed in tier 2, we did not go further and rank them. And but if I have to answer that question without consulting with the team and you asked, I would keep the ones in the elementary schools.

And then kind of on that is if if that's something we wanted to do as a board, how do we like kind of go about asking that?

Well, I think that, you know, I don't you guys get to decide how you want to handle this, but I just want to um name that it's not our job to run the schools. It's our job to support the people whom we trust to run the schools.

And this is one of these questions where I understand the the goodness and the like the wanting to make our schools the best that they can be and it feels like it brushes right up against um getting our fingers into something that's not our business. And so I just want to name that because it's I don't want to um I think inadvertently a question like that can send the message that we don't trust the people in this room. Um and I don't think that was your intention, Chris, at all. But I just want to name that there's this line that um is not well defined and I just want to that that going there makes me start to like feel uncomfortable about that line. For me personally, I I don't I appreciate that comment and you know, even in what I just said. I mean, that may create the impression that I just I don't care about the middle school as much, and that's just not the case. I I I don't want to create a sense of winners and losers and cherrypicking among the schools. If you if the board asked me to come up with a number that's between one tier and another, what I would really need to do is go back to the team and talk about, okay, what what do we do? And come back to you.

I can tell you it would be what you're seeing in the tears is very to the nth degree thought out about as we go down what's the least painful thing to get there and you're seeing the reasoning already.

Um I super appreciate that Stephanie. I I really hope that I I don't doesn't seem like I don't respect um respect that at all, but as a kind of counterpoint to that saying we want a 6% or 7% or an 8% tier is pretty arbitrary.

Um and so that's kind of what I'm wrestling with in my mind of trying to understand that well but is this what we could do if we had just that little bit more but we needed to stay within that tier that that that specific number. So that's why we chose what we chose. Um, and again I that's kind of why I asked like how do we as a board do that because I don't want to be cherrypicking and and being like well I want this position and I want this position but not that position. And like I don't think that's what we we should be doing.

Um so that's kind of why I I mentioned that.

Um, I mean, like Tom said, it is the board's it is the board's prerogative to choose how we want to adopt our budget.

Um my preference would be if we wanted them would be to put it to them to say like what would be and it might you know I guess from tier two it would they're all in tech position so one of them would be in that tech position but one of them was an interventionist right so it could be that it's you know um the the preference there um Yeah, the the the whole cherry-picking idea I don't love. I felt that was that was kind of where we devolved to last year.

Um but um you know we could we could approach it however we like. Steph um and I didn't think that that's what you're doing, Chris, for the record, but um uh and thanks for your graciousness of my comment. Um, but I it's almost like the question that comes to me is what what do we need to be comfortable with a suggested percentage? And I don't know if I understand what we need as a board to become comfortable with a percentage. And so maybe that's how we could consider approaching it. Um, that's just an idea because it's sort of like otherwise it's like a chicken or the egg situation where we're like, I don't know if I like this percentage because I don't know if I like the things that would be required to get us to the this percentage, but we don't want to dictate the things that get us to the percentage. So, I think we need to ask ourselves like what would we need to be comfortable with saying this is the percentage that we're comfortable with.

Isn't that what we were talking about a little bit last meeting when we were saying, and maybe that's just punting it down the road, but okay, hey Tom, like what would if we wanted something between seven and 8%. What would you what would it look like? And then he goes back and he he makes the position list, not us. And then from there, it's sort of like, okay, that's that much of an increase.

like do we feel like that's worth it or go back to tier two and and that is how we have approached it in previous years. There have been sort of tiers of like this is this is what we definitely think we need. This is what we'd like to have. I mean and to be fair, this was sort of the inverse of what we're dealing with now. It was like additions, right? And you know the fun days where we could add things. Um but it was like you know this is what we have to have. this is what we, you know, we'd like to have and like, hey, if you're willing, this is what we, you know, um, and they were and they were prioritized in that level. So, you know, um, not to say that we never moved something out of its order, but typically it was like we sort of picked the level we were comfortable with, like where did we feel like we were comfortable from a from a budget perspective and to live within that the the ad admin's team's recommendation is like, okay, with that, this is what we would do with it. and it was less about the board picking specific ones and you know 13 years we've been all over the place on how we've dealt with the budget. Um but I mean that that has certainly been um a way we have a protocol we have used in the past too.

I know for me as somebody who was an outsider famously last year and here now, um I think seeing a lot of these positions pop up that were also on the list last year, I know that if I were the person in that position, it would be gut-wrenching to have this happen to me year after year. And so I think for me to be comfortable with a cut, I would want to know that we're not perpetuating it again next year. we're not gonna be sitting in the same position next year saying, "Okay, well, we saved them last year, but this year we probably really mean it." I just I think that's the worst part of what happened last year that's happening this year is I think a lot of those same folks are in that same boat that they were in last year. And I can't even imagine it. And I know that this is bleak. I agree. Very bleak. I don't like it. None of us do.

I'm pretty sure um I also don't want to put anybody through that again next year. And I think that was the whole point of meeting in November is what can we do to kind of stop the bleeding and really stop the bleeding, not just kind of bandage it up until next year and then hope it's healed.

If if I may, sorry. I I really feel I want you all to know that the group of people sitting in the back row would not let me bring a proposal to you that we had not really talked about and believed could work and would be good. Um, and they I just need you to know that um m are there maybe holes in our thinking, things we haven't considered? Sure, we're human. Um, you know, and I think having our thinking probed as healthy and important, and I I would never want to be defensive about that. Um, but just just know there's not been a cavalier moment in any of these conversations.

I have no doubt.

Yeah, I I really appreciate that because I think that's where I'm going with my mind set is that I want to know that if we're going to make these cuts that we are not seriously compromising the the education that we're providing to our students, that we we still have ways to to meet their needs even if we cut these positions. And I'm hearing from Tom and from the educators back there that we feel that we can still meet their needs adequately and even more than adequately if we cut these edte positions. And so although you know I don't love the idea of of these people losing their positions um under the circumstances, I feel confident that you guys have done your homework and that you are you're you're ready to meet the needs even when we take these people out of our budget. So thank you.

I'm sure someone's going to throw something at me, but um I mean I guess my other question is the way to preserve those positions is and and still stay at the same budget level is do we eliminate the positions we continue to not be able to fill the special ed edtech positions?

Well, we have to provide the services by law, but presumably we are providing the services now or are we not? I mean, I'm I'm just trying to be creative here. You know, it's 10:15. I love new ideas. Uh um we So, we have discussed that.

Um and you know, if I'm getting this wrong, somebody shoot me down. But I think I think it's really important that we preserve those positions because that is where our need really is the greatest. And even if the positions aren't filled, I think we have to name it and keep trying to meet that need in the way it should be met.

Okay, Colin.

I have so many thoughts, but I'm only going to give one. I think that um it would be really helpful to have a little bit of a clearer sense at the next meeting of um of again knowing that there's all sorts of of factors that could contribute to things. But um if we were to go with the current proposal of 6 whatever it is 53 um what is that like what does that do for us in the next budget cycle um versus um versus something higher than that. Um because I think that's uh I don't know. I mean, I think that um I think we've we we definitely have new factors that came in this year. Like I think you've definitely made that clear that there have been factors that have come in. Um but I think there were things that probably um the board could have seen uh coming down the pike um a bit more. And so I think that's I think I think having a clear sense of like is there really a functional difference between 6.53 and 7 in terms of like what we would face next year or we really talking about like um like we would we would need to go to the like disastrous one that you're talking about in order to like make next year a year in which we would not have to make these sorts of cuts.

We are working on that. Um, and we'll definitely have it ready for you.

Okay. Um, you know, I never want to cut you off when you when you want to talk about things, but we do have more budget meetings scheduled. You get two weeks off this time. Uh, we'll meet again on the 25th. I'm just cognizant of the time. Um, I think I think that tonight's conversation was good. I really appreciate the presentation about the the potential ways forward for the configuration. I think we had some clarity um at least I did on some of the questions on the budget. Um and as always it's to be continued.

Um we have no new business. We have no personnel issues. Um we we are back to public comment. So he's like I'm out. Um all right. Well then I would take a motion to adjurnn.

Valerie and Cara, thank you. All those in favor, no one votes no.

============================================================

RSU5 BOARD OF DIRECTORS MEETING TRANSCRIPT
Meeting Date: February 25, 2026
Source File: transcript_2026-02-25_2UEfeUSKPY4.txt
District: Regional School Unit 5 (Freeport, Durham, Pownal, Maine)
============================================================

I was a while, but yes, I mean, David Johnson, I'm probably when I was Good evening. Welcome to the RSU5 board of directors meeting. It is Wednesday, February 25th, 2026. We are here in the Freeport High School Library. Uh currently Steph isn't with us yet, but she is on her way, but we'll get started in the meantime with the Pledge of Allegiance.

To the flag of the republic for it stands one nation indivisible with liberty and justice for all.

Okay. So, do I have a motion for consideration? Did I knock that off? Okay, good start.

Uh, do I have a motion for consideration and approval of the minutes from the February 4th, 2026 meeting and February 11th, 2026 meeting as presented, barring any errors or omissions?

Kelly and Karen. Thank you. All those in favor, let Steph vote as she's walking in. There we go.

None opposed. Adjustments to the agenda. Yes.

Thank you. Uh yes, I'd like to add item 13A, which is a motion to make a change to the school calendar.

Okay, we will get there. Um so we will start with good news and recognition with Moon.

Hi everyone. Um, I'd like to say that um, a lot of sporting events have happened over the last couple weeks and I'm pleased to say that both the boys and girls did really well um, in their respective sports. And to start off, the girls indoor track team won states. The boys indoor track team came in second at states. Uh, the girls Nordic team came in first for states. The boys Nordic team finished eighth in the state championships. And then the Freeport Yarmouth girls um are the state champions in hockey and they beat Chevis. And then the boys alpine team got fourth at states.

And then we also have region 10 students of the quarter. And we have Aada Cornish in the auto collision repair. Uh Michaela Feltus in the certified nursing assistant. Jacob Hana in the building trades. We got Kaylee McGary in the creative digital media. We got Logo Logan Proctor in the pre-apprenticeship.

And we got Kay and Santos in the IT/Cyberc.

And then also on March 25th, we have a career fair that'll be held in the Freeper High School gym from 10:30 to 1 for students to learn about careers and hear from different organizations and businesses.

And then also last will be Freeport High School has a senior class has an auction night. Our auction that begins um that began Sunday, February 22nd and also will end until or run until Sunday, March 8th at 6 p.m. And I have the auction link if anyone wants it. But it'd be great to support the class in um for their I guess their night. I guess their senior night. Thank you.

Thank you. Yeah. I don't know if anybody watched any of the gold medal hockey games in the last week or so, but I think I was more stressed going into the overtime of the girls hockey state championship game than I was sitting at home on uh last week and Sunday. But congratulations to everyone in their sporting events um as the winter season comes to a close.

Uh all right, so we will move on to public comment. Um did you give me the paper yet? No, not yet. Okay. So, we'll do a little bit of uh um housekeeping on how public comment works, particularly because we do have a fair amount of folks, so we want to make sure we can hear from as many people as possible. Um and uh so how it'll work once I have the list, feel free to put your name on if you'd like to speak. Um is we will call folks up and I'll probably call the next person so we can kind of queue up uh to keep things moving. When you get to the microphone, we ask that you give your name and the town where you live and that uh you keep your comments to three minutes uh per person. And we will have a timer running. So, if you hear the timer go off, we just ask that you kind of wrap up your thought uh so we can hear from as many folks as possible tonight because we do we also do have a full agenda as well, but we want to make sure that we hear from uh from folks who came to join us. Um, and just um just a note uh we have two public comments on our agenda every board meeting. Uh so one's here at the beginning and one is at the end after we've gone through all of our uh board business. So if you weren't uh inspired to speak now but are so inspired later in the evening, there is another opportunity. All right, so we will start with Lindsay Han and Heather.

Um I'm just apologize for names. I am terrible at it. So, Heather Lamaka will be uh will be next after Lindsay.

Okay.

Oh, I'm sorry. So, right here at the podium and uh the mic is right there. We you do generally need to get closer to the mic than you probably feel comfortable with. Um but we want to make sure that the um not only the folks here can hear you, but also the meetings are live streamed and recorded. So, we want to make sure people at home can hear you as well. So, uh your name, your town, and three minutes is yours.

Yeah. Thank you. Um my name is Mark Douly. I'm the father of a Pano Elementary School student. I live at 196 Merrill Road and I'm here to talk about the recent proposal from RSU5 school board that negatively impacts Pano.

RSU5 has a budget shortfall. The top budget goal is to use the six school buildings in a more efficient manner.

At the February 11th schoolboard meeting, the superintendent proposed to repurpose Panel Elementary School into a new early childhood school for all RSU5 children.

As far as I could tell, 100% of the board members supported the motion to further explore this scenario as the most promising option.

Scenario two requires Panel to give up its elementary school and bus kids to Durham instead.

On the other hand, Freeport and Durham get a new early childhood school in Powell with lots of outdoor space.

Free if the plan is followed to fruition, Panel kids will have a longer bus ride and receive a lower quality education.

This will trigger a drop in property values and ultimately a reduction in town revenue.

From the perspective of the members of the panel community, this seems like an unjust proposal.

Considering RSU5 as a unit, the proposal appears efficient because early childhood education can be expanded without adding additional buildings.

I'll get back to the costs in a moment, but it's it's important to acknowledge the quality of the education at Pano Elementary School. Will sending Pano students to Durham result in a better better education for Pano students? It doesn't really seem likely.

Pano is ranked as a top school in Maine.

One's website had the school at number two out of 288 just two years ago.

In addition, enrollment in in Pano increased by about 18% since 2023, while district-wide enrollment decreased by about 5% during the same period.

Last Saturday, I knocked on doors to speak with neighbors and get our petition signed.

I learned firsthand that Pano residents want to keep their elementary school and that budget is very important to them.

This brings us back to costs.

I think there are a few big budget risks associated with such a complex reorganization of the district. For starters, I think they're the for starters, if the plan is implemented, RSU5 will still maintain the same six buildings, except now they'll have increased programming for three and four year olds. In addition, the change might ultimately require building modifications to account for the change of use space, transportation redesign, staffing reorganization, and curriculum realignment. Each of those elements carries financial and operational uncertainty and risk.

And my time is up, so I was hoping I could pass it to Lindsay uh so that she could advocate for scenario one. Thank you.

Thank you, Mark. Good evening. My name is Lindseay Han.

I'm a panel resident and a mother to four young children who hope to attend PES one day and presently attend. I would like to present a case to explore scenario one instead of continuing to explore scenario two. Scenario one would allow the district to minimize uncertainty by implementing manageable targeted changes with more certain budget outcomes. It would address mandates by ex and encouraging exploration of public private partnerships for early childhood education. It could resolve cost imbalances by utilizing less disruptive tools such as opening interd district enrollment. It could manage the budget in a controlled manner. Scenario one would allow us to explore options to address shortfalls without placing a disproportionate burden on one specific community.

Given the inequity of scenario two of repurposing the Panel Elementary School for mostly Durham and Freeport use and the budget risks associated with the complex change, it would be very difficult to get the Panel community to agree to this plan. The keystone of the plan is to change our elementary school, which is the heart of our community. It is my hope that the panel community rallies around pees to support a solution to the budget shortfall that does not include dismantling the school and sending our kids to Durham. I appreciate the board's stated commitment to gathering stakeholder input before moving forward with scenario two. And in that vein, I would like to present a petition created by the parents of Panel children to oppose the dissolution of our elementary school. The petition now carries more than 800 signatures with 500 of those from Powell, Durham, and Freeport residents. In a town of our size, that number represents a significant and unmistakable expression of community will. Families have spoken clearly and in large numbers. Mr. Gray's email to the RSU5 community on February 12th stated that the perspective of parents and children are essential and will shape the path forward. If that is true, then the overwhelming response from panel families is that eliminating or repurposing our elementary school is not an acceptable solution.

Respectfully, any further time and resources spent investigating scenario 2 should be redirected to other solutions that do not include repurposing Panel Elementary. We understand the district faces financial and structural challenges. We're ready to engage constructively in conversations about sustainability, equity, and early childhood programming. But this conversations must begin with the assurance that our local elementary school will remain intact. We look forward to continued dialogue but with the clear understanding that parents of panel children are committed to the preservation of Panel Elementary School and will continue to voice our strong opposition to scenario 2 until the board has decided to move on from it. Thank you. Thank you, Lindsay.

Heather. And then after Heather, I have uh Taylor Steel, I think.

Hi, my name is Heather Lee Maka. I live in Powell. I'm a mother to two kids who currently attend PEES in preK and kindergarten. I could not be more happy with our cute little school. The amazing things that has done for my kids in just the two years that they've attended, it's unmistakable.

Um, I know you guys face a lot of pressure in trying to make decisions and find a way that's going to work for RSU5 and the communities that it serves. Um, the heart of Pel in my opinion is our school. We have such a strong connection with that school. There's there's adult programs that happen there just other places, but having that as one of our our stakeholder resources in our small town is such a big deal to that community. Um, we moved to Panel because of its outdoor kind of uh leanings and what it has available and I think the school has really integrated that that outdoor play in how they create and shape classrooms for our children so they can grow diligently. We so value what these teachers are putting into our kids. We um I'm just so worried that if we pursue the second option that we go down a very scary pathway for my family and a lot of our families. um when you think about what's needs to transition to have three and fouryear-old IEP students um if they were to you know be in that school in that scenario I think it changes the the building classification from an educational to an institutional and if you look at just fire suppression alone that's easily $200,000 just to think about doing that because you have to have an entirely different system if it's a different code so all of the codes are way stricter and it opens up a huge can of worms and I'm I'm sure you guys have thought of that, but that is a huge financial burden to repurpose that particular building. Um, when I think about for my family the extra the travel, it's, you know, 28,000 miles per year extra beyond going to Panel Elementary School. It is 48 extra hours in the car just to bring my kids to and from, not extracurricular there. That is just the bare minimum. If if we're thinking about other solutions, just to put it out there, um if we combined with MS851 North Yarmouth, and we were to potentially use that North Yarmas community center that they have on Route 9 that used to be a school, so has a lot of the codes and those things, and it has a gym, and it has all of that space. I don't know how it's being utilized, but wouldn't it be cool if that was one of the things that we could potentially do between districts and other community um ideas? I hope that we continue to remain open to opportunities that people can bring forward from the community so we can find a different option that doesn't give us um the uh the loss of the heartb blood of our town.

Thank you, Heather. So Taylor, right? Yeah. So after Taylor, I have Rich Brenl.

Hi, my name is Taylor Steel. I am a mom of two, one who's at Panel and one who I hope to send there um in a few years.

I've watched the video from the last school board meeting more times than I care to admit. A few key takeaways stood out to me. You all recognize that PES is a wonderful school and as you can see this evening and also the outpouring of support gained within just the two weeks since your last meeting, the community strongly opposes moving forward with scenario 2. I also kept hearing concerns raised about the inequity of class sizes across the district. And when looking at year-over-year class sizes across RSU5 grades K through five over the last five years, the averages are Morse Street and Mass Landing or 20, Poundell Elementary at 15, and Durham at 16. While the total size of Poundell is smaller, which is also reflective of the population as a of the town, it is far from an outlier when it comes to average class size. And on the topic of growth, the Panel community is growing. In 2021, eight new homes were built in Panel. Since then, an average of 14 new homes have been built each year with multiple developments planned, one of which is slated for 20 homes alone. Families with young children like mine are drawn to Panel because of its elementary school.

It is why we moved to Panel and bought a home in Panel. As that growth continues, average class sizes will reflect it.

Finally, I think the board moved past Chris's point too quickly. The idea of repurposing or expanding more street to accommodate early education. If part of the argument for scenario two is avoiding deferred costs during a high inflationary period and if more street will require significant investment in the future anyway, then that feels like a very valid path to at least explore.

One that doesn't completely uproot an entire community's elementary school.

This is a timely and worthwhile idea that deserves serious consideration.

Please do not close a thriving school.

Thank you, Taylor. So, after which I have Megan Mezer.

Thank you. Um, since I'm the fourth uh panel Oh, thank you. Perfect. Since I'm the fourth uh Pel parent in a row to come up here, um I'm going to ask you to just I I know I said your name before, but just so it's for the Rich Ridge and Panel Libby Road. Um I have a a first grader in Panel Elementary School now. Uh a prek to be enrolling in the fall and a middle schooler in Freeport Middle School um in sixth grade. And I just uh I want to second all of the um great ideas and oppos you know opposition to the scenario too. I've watched the video and um I also want to acknowledge that these are uh difficult issues that the board and uh superintendent are are grappling with and I really appreciate the work that's going into this. Um I want to share one just p personal example about panel elementary school and the culture that's fostered there. uh my first grader, it's actually his seventh birthday this evening and we had the birthday birthday celebration before this and I went to the school board and we've been, you know, we've been struggling to talk about the the possibility of what's what might happen to the school, but he really wanted me to come and he also wanted to tell me that his favorite part of his birthday today was um one when his name was announced on the loudspeaker uh in the morning announcements. that's a that you know that's that's a panel elementary school tradition and the other that it coincided with the hundth day of school celebration that uh that PES does. Um he was he was more excited about those those things that made it special in the school today um than anything else about his birthday um save maybe for the cake.

And he he also um he also it demonstrates that each of these students at pees is known and nurtured and loved by the by the staff and a a a a real culture of um individual um you know knowing the knowing the student and the learner as an individual is really fostered there. And that kind of culture uh doesn't take one year or even one decade to build. and um it it can be uh easily and quickly um you know taken apart and it it will take a long time to rebuild. So I appreciate the the board's work and um want to come to this with an open mind but certainly want to um echo the the the um opposition to the dissolving of panel elementary. Thank you.

Thank you Rich. So after Megan I have Nicholas Seir.

All right. Is that working? Nope. You're gonna do it. Thank you.

Hello everyone. I'm Megan Mezer. Um I'm a Panel resident and the mother of a current first grader at Powell Elementary.

Um, we've lived in Panel for 10 years now, but it wasn't until our daughter started at Panel Elementary that our lives in the community began.

It's not just about meeting and connecting with so many other families there at the school itself. It's that the school is the core fiber and heart of the panel community. As so as so many others have said, it's not because of the physical presence of the building. It's because of the magic that is created there each and every day by multiple ages learning together and from each other in a close-knit, thriving community.

I'm here to ask the board to remove all options under consideration that involve dissolving or restructuring Panel Elementary.

It's overwhelmingly clear that this is widely opposed and really affecting the panel community, which has been, I should note, year after year, notably supportive of RSU5 budgets.

We know mindful discussions and compromises will need to be made as a community to ensure our school district remains strong and sustainable, but it is also important to identify the non-negotiables. Non-negotiables.

Dismantling a thriving school and community hub is off the table and panel has only started to begin to voice how we oppose this. So we ask you to please continue to consider option one and take option two and three off the table.

Thanks. Thank you Megan. So after Nicholas I have met Aliieri.

Good evening. Uh my name is Nicholas here. I am a father of uh Winslow, a first grader at Panel uh Panel resident um and soon to be Margot prek going in this fall. Um when this proposal was um presented and um shared with me for the first time um a lot of thoughts came to mind and um as echoed by a lot of the parents here just how important the school is to the families and the the community in Pel. Um, my daughter, uh, uh, Pan Elementary is extremely important to my to my my daughter in particularly. Uh, and just seeing her flourish there has just been, um, very, um, rewarding. Um, couldn't couldn't describe the amount of pride I have for her, um, developing there. Um, trying to think of what to say tonight.

um didn't really know what I was going to say, but Monday staying home with her for uh the snow day, she kind of to told me what to say. So, um sitting on the floor playing um with our dolls, doing a picnic, um she looked at her sister Marggo and held up a doll and said, "Ponel Panthers are learners that show they show cooperation, assertion, responsibility, empathy, and self-control. Go Panthers." Um I think that just in a snapshot kind of highlights what it means to the kids and the families in Powell and I hope you um consider option one and not option two and three. Thank you.

Thank you Nicholas.

So after Matt I have Andy Seymour I think.

Good evening. I'm Matt Alieri. I'm the proud parent of three current panel Panthers. Um, I want to start by observing that I speak from experience when I say I know it's a difficult position to be in uh to be on a board where you're making decisions about which people feel great passion. Um, and I I have a proposal. I think it's in line with what everybody else has said that that would make the next year or so a lot easier for you.

Um, over the last two weeks, I've seen a community in Panel that has just been galvanized.

I've seen people start text threads, uh, start petitions that have gathered nearly a thousand signatures, uh, nearly as many signatures as there were votes approving last year's RSU5 budget. seen uh people go doortodoor knocking to talk to their neighbors about their RSU5 and Powell elementary school experiences. Um we've started parties to get together and talk about ways to both help RSU5 and ensure that this plan to shutter our school doesn't go forward. And and this is just the start. This is a community in action. It's been inspiring, but it's not at all surprising. Here's why.

Shuttering the best perform one of the best performing schools in the state in the name of academic success and student outcomes just doesn't make sense.

Depriving children of the community in which they've thrived and which they have started to call their home in the name of equity is simply wrong.

The reality is that as long as closing PES remains on the table, the opposition that you see here tonight will just grow and grow and grow. This room is full and in two weeks, if this plan is still on the table, it will be double in size. I assure you of that. We'll be here organized, vocal, and passionate for as long as it takes.

And I have complete confidence in this.

At the end of this process, whether it ends tonight or it ends a year from now, you will conclude that this proposal, scenario two, misses the mark. It doesn't meet the objectives that Superintendent Gray identified.

So, it as a simple choice.

You can end tonight the proposal to shutter Panel Elementary School and replace it uh with something that's altogether and entirely different. and we can move forward as a group to identify proposals that will work to address the very real challenges that Superintendent Gray has identified.

All it takes is one member of the board tonight to vote to terminate the consideration of scenario 2 and any plan that would shutter Panel Elementary School as it currently exists. And the rest of you are voting in favor of that.

I beg you not to waste another moment on this plan. This board and this community need to move forward together on proposals that will actually work.

Thank you, Matt. Andy. Okay, so after Andy, I have Brett.

All right.

Uh, hi, my name's Andy. I'm usually uh I speak more from the hip, but tonight I had to organize my thoughts, so bear with me. I am I'm a panel resident. I have a kindergartener and a fourth grader at Panel. I've lived in Powell for nearly 20 years now. I watched the recent RSU meeting and I want to offer perspective from the community most affected directly by the proposals on the table. This conversation puts us in a clear ethical dilemma, something Tom mentioned in the last in the last meeting.

uh a simple right and wrong frame that doesn't reflect what this school tr truly represents. It's a hard discussion but panel cannot stay quiet. Our school is special in a real everyday way. It sits on the backside of Bradbury and offers an outdoor learning environment that people across the district openly praise.

I've heard board members call it an outstanding out outdoor experience and a unique resource for students from Freeport and Durham. Yet in the next breath, it becomes an aging, inefficient real estate asset that needs to be repurposed.

That contradiction is impossible to miss. How could something be an incredible resource for everyone else, but not worth keeping for the families who actually live here?

And here's a part of the panel uh here's the part that hits the panel the hardest. It's being framed as an amazing opportunity, but only when panel children aren't the ones attending.

When our kids go here, the school is called inefficient. When the kids from Freeport and Durham are imagined here, suddenly becomes a district-wide gem.

The double standard makes it clear the school is valuable uh just not for the families who built their lives around it. Equity has been mentioned many times. Equity matters, but it should it should not erase the community's only local school. Many of us chose Panel specifically to send our children to the school.

And this is why history matters. When RSC5 was formed, the board and superintendent promised Panel Elementary would not be closed. I've been here long enough to remember when Panel was an independent school. Um, the current proposal may not be labeled as a closure, but if Panel children can't attend, then the school is effectively closed to the town. A school that the community cannot attend or cannot use is not that community's school. Cost per student has also come up repeatedly.

Yes, it is higher per in panel, but that's not a failing. It's the nature of a small community education. And the motto that the district agreed to when RSU5 was created. Families here didn't create that number. We simply set our kids to school in our town. Using a metric to eliminate panel school experience feels less like equity and more like efficiency at one community's expense. So, I need to ask, is it equitable for Panel to be the only town that cannot send its children to grades 1 through five in their own community?

Is it equitable to remove the very experience many of us moved here for? If the board chooses to take our school away, please don't call it equity. That does not pass the straight face test for the people who live here. For years, we've heard whispers about closing, and I appreciate the board for finally acknowledging them. But this doesn't feel like a shared sacrifice. It feels like panel being asked once again to take the largest hit for the advantage of larger towns.

So that's probably the sound I'm supposed to wrap up. Correct. So I'll I'll read my last sentence. So tonight I'm asking you to to see what's right in front of you. Panel has been loyal contributing part of this district from the start. A school is not a liability.

It's an asset the community built supported and shared. If it's a valuable enough for students from Freeport and Durham, it's valuable enough for Pal's children.

If we're asking for fairness, for honesty, and the dignity of being treated as a full community with within RSU5, you have the opportunity to choose the path that honors every town. I'm asking you to take that path and let panel keep the school that has shaped our identity and our future.

Thank you, Andy. So, after Brett, I have Ren Renee.

So, I'm I'm Brett Victory. I live in town and uh first of all I have to confess to an egregious mistake that I made earlier this evening in coming in I was signing my name and like on so many other petitions I signed my name my wife's name under it and uh I I without really considering uh that she uh might not want to speak. So don't don't expect don't expect Renee to come up. So and I'll hear more about that later.

Um so uh I was raised by uh two uh teachers and in a small school um and uh um we raised our children our two children in Maine and uh when we heard and um our our daughter uh and husband who live in Pel um were pregnant. Uh we really ramped up our search for a home and uh um we bought a house um uh three months after our grandson was born. And uh I know uh personally what the closure of the Powell Elementary School would mean to my my grandchildren uh who we um take to school and pick up from school and uh and and to my children to u Heather and Mark Leah. Um it is the cutest, sweetest little school I've ever seen. It's just amazing when I think of the experiences that I had in um as as a youngster in elementary pre in kindergarten and elementary school.

They were a mixed bag. When I had a chance to um uh chaperon and help the teachers at Powell Elementary School on a on a field trip outing, um I was uh so impressed by the kids. They are the sweetest little kids. and when one of their classmates would do something they didn't like, they showed so much patience. I've never seen such a large group of kids behave with such respect to one another. And as I've gotten to know the teachers, I can understand exactly uh about the parents in Panel and the teachers of their children.

It I'm just speaking from my heart. what I see out there is unlike any public inst educational institution I've ever seen and this goes for charter schools and you know it it's just amazing and for our family to see the skating rink and and the playground and have our kids come home. What did you do today? Well, we went skiing. We went snowshoeing. We took a walk in the forest. We went ice skating. It's just like holy cow. And there are so many activities that involve not just the kids, but their parents, their whole families. And it's just such an unbelievable treasure. And it would it would break our family's heart to have the school close. Thank you.

Thank you, Brett.

So, I'm going to give Renee a second to decide if she wants to speak or not, and she's she's giving me the uh oh no. So, we will move on to Brandon. uh Perry Ferry.

And then after Brandon, I have uh Jesse Fisk.

I'll do the honors.

I'm Brandon Perry. I'm at 290 Fet Road in Powell. I have a prek and a someday going to be a prek uh kiddo at home. Uh so I came here before you guys today to say much of what I've heard a lot of other Uh so as I was hearing people articulate things far more effectively than I can, I thought maybe I'd take a different tack as well and kind of discuss uh economically and in terms of a feeder cycle for our uh educational staff and the general culture and educational excellence I'm sure you all strive for every day. uh how panel is kind of a model uh school for this and I I think starting from the position of panel clearly has strong outcomes and that there's a concern about equity I am dismayed to hear uh option two is on the table because it kind of says to me that we are sacrificing excellence in the face of efficiency or in the face of uh you know averaging out the experience across the board for everyone. one. Uh, but I think, you know, if we're being honest, we'd want all of the children to receive that excellence standard of education. They'd all like to be able to experience that level of excellence.

And I think the uh core uh you know direction it almost feels like it's a directionally wrong proposal uh because we aren't moving towards something that's actually going to advance uh either the children's outcomes uh it's going to potentially shatter the excellent staffing that we've built in Panel Elementary. What happens with them? Are they well represented here today and in the other meetings? uh these people have built up their careers, their um you know experience has been in very strong educational settings and many of them come with a a very lengthy background and again you've heard how wonderful it is and the the kids it's unreal. You get a room full of 100 pound kids. It is incredible like these little adults running around really. They're they're so well put together and well adjusted generally and they are kind and smart and driven and uh you know I'd hate to see that lost.

What I would like to see is that it's gained across the board and I know that doesn't really help with the financial woes. uh you know inflation being what it is, we have some need for either income or you know cut and we also have a passed down um you know dictate about how we're going to operate even earlier childhood care special education is eating us alive and so I recognize the need for something to be done and uh I I recognize you're hearing a lot of just no today and that you probably also need to have a path forward on something that can actually reach those goals.

And I don't have that answer for you today, but I just say uh there's this concept of uh online if you ever want to get an answer to something uh and you're on a forum, post the wrong answer confidently. And I feel like that's kind of what maybe happened here is, you know, there is a very strongly proposed option two. Um, and it really it it wrankled a lot of people. And I think at this point now, we're all willing to lend a hand to make sure that that doesn't happen, but that something good does come of this. And uh, you know, you've caught our attention and you've gotten us involved and I'd like to see us continue being involved and helping sculpt what the future can look like and be more involved in budgeting and being really present in this process. Uh, and I think we can do that together. So, you know, I wouldn't necessarily consider us in opposition, but more that we want to navigate to a strong solution that'll actually meet the educational goals for Freeport and Durham in addition to Panel. And we'd like to propagate these educational stories out to as many kids as we can.

So, we see how valuable it is. Every generation who has their kids go through, they feel that way and uh we want to make that happen across the board.

Thank you. Thank you, Brandon. So after Jesse, we have Megan Arena.

So my name is Jesse Fisk. I am a panel resident and uh our children are in grades uh 1, four, and six. Uh obviously I'm not unique that my wife and I chose to move here in large part uh because of the school system. Uh having a small community elementary school and then the opportunities of a larger regional middle school and high school uh made a lot of sense to us.

uh and we haven't been disappointed. Uh but just as important as what the school does for our children is, you know, as mentioned, what the school does for our community. Uh for a large segment of panel, uh PS is the foundation of our community. Uh it's where parents meet each other and where relationships between families are made. At the last board meeting, uh, Superintendent Gray uh, told you community identity is quote something we cannot underestimate and then both proposals ignored that. I was confused.

Uh, the justification uh, a lot of talk about equity understandably uh, equity of class sizes has been discussed. Panel is growing. The other schools are stagnant or shrinking. Our building permit numbers are going up. I don't think that'll be a problem too long. the equity of cost per student.

Yes, as I believe Andy mentioned, we're a school of 100 students. The economy is a scale. It's not practical that we're going to be that we're going to compete with schools 300 plus students. It doesn't matter if you put prekers or sixth graders there. Uh if anything, the cost per student is going to increase with the associated transportation cost to bust them in from across the district.

uh not explicitly discussed as far as I could tell uh last meeting, but I still get the sense there's uh equity concerns or almost jealousy uh about our how wonderful our school is.

Uh the unique opportunities that PES offers. Uh we are blessed to have an amazing PE teacher, Mr. Mr. T. Uh but a lot of what allows these activities to be available to our children is really the community. Uh the parents as you see are very invested in our school and so many of us volunteer with the school in one way or another. We have impact who's instrumental in organizing a lot of these programs and don't think that building that the building at 587 Elmwood is intrinsically special. If the building's repurposed, I don't think there will be the community support to allow many of these activities to continue.

You talk about equity at the middle school level. Understandably, uh you want to help Durham middle schoolers have access to more activities, but at the elementary level, it seems you want to decreased opportunities so we can be equitable across the district. Uh to wrap up and echo Andy, uh one last question is how equitable is it that Freeport will continue to have an elementary school, Durham will continue to have an elementary school, and Panel Elementary School be closed? That doesn't sound equitable. Thank you.

Thank you, Jesse. After Megan, I have uh Julie Baird.

Good evening everyone. Megan Arena uh from Panel. I'm the proud parent of a Panel Panther as well. Today I'd like to express my strong commitment to maintaining Panel Elementary Schools, a pre-K to 5 school for Panel children.

Panel Elementary serves as a hub of our community and the pride in our school.

As you've heard many times tonight, our teachers, the pride in our teachers, our school, and our students runs deep. It is a place where students regularly play in the forest, as noted by several of you at the last meeting, and where parents stage a second impromptu talent show to host a performer who is sick during a school's regularly scheduled one. It's a place where families know and look out for one another and regularly share resources, achievements, and struggles.

It's a place where the community comes together to build an ice rink each year to clean out Minkleberry so that it's safe for our children and volunteers as swim chaperoons in the middle of the day. In fact, most of the day uh so that children learn this important life skill. It's a community who cares deeply for each other in our school. The community is responsible for this as Jesse just noted. It's not the building itself. If you take away that affinity, that community, the rest of what's appealing about PES disappears, too. We may not have a new community programs building nor a fancy playground like other schools in the district, but the relationships formed at Palinal Elementary between parents, students, and teachers are irreplaceable.

Community connections and identity must be honored and recognized as important.

I watched the recent board meeting with interest, and I know budgets are a concern here and everywhere. However, I found the board's discussion of the options to be anything but thoughtful.

There seemed to be a great deal of concern over equity, presumably referring to cost per student, though that was never stated. What was articulated was the desire to provide panels outdoor space to other groups instead.

Swapping one group for another is far from equitable.

I also heard with great interest that equities exist at the middle school level, and I agree that those should be remedied immediately. However, world language, STEM, and athletic offerings seem to be fixable in far less drastic ways. While I applaud the importance you place on equity, I urge you to consider the equity surrounding ripping students from their neighborhood school so that another group of students can simply use it instead.

While I heard at the board meeting that these things have been quietly talked about for a long time, I can confidently share that many other ideas have also been quietly talked about in the panel community. And should anyone have reached out to us or engaged us in brainstorming, we would have shared those valuable ideas with you as well.

Mr. Gray, you opened your remarks by stating your belief that we should do what's right for kids, not for the budget. What's right for students in Punnel as well as other impacted schools is not to shuffle and rearrange students at all grade levels so drastically.

Surely you're well aware of the research surrounding building transitions and their negative impact on student achievement growth and mental health.

One article I sent Mr. Gray discusses the chaos factor that naturally comes with upending students announces that some students never recover, particularly those with IEPs or those that are underrepresented. Oh god, I'm only halfway done, you guys.

Okay. Uh, thank you for your time tonight. Um, what I'll say is that there will not be buyin from the panel community. I'm the 12th pond parent up here. Um, the room is packed as you've seen. You've heard that there are is a petition with over 800 signatures. There are lawn signs distributed. There are postcards already at at homes.

We'll we'll keep working together hopefully, but this is not something that you have buyin for. Thank you. Thank you, Megan.

So, uh, after Julie, I have Kate Martins.

Hello. My name is Julie Baird. I'm a panel resident. I have two kids in the district, one in middle school and one in the high school. So, I no longer have skin in this game, but it is still very important to me. Um, I am a panel resident. Um, as a former full-time elementary school teacher, I as my I was increasingly nervous about sending my school age kids to school as they grew older. Having come from a large district out of state that was labeled one of the best in the nation, I saw firsthand how much this format of education hurt children, especially the littlest ones.

I wanted something different for my children than that and I found it in Panel. So passionate for this little rural elementary school that I drove 25 minutes from the Wolfneck Peninsula where our rental home was to Panel and then back again so my kids could attend there. And PS that's without bus stops.

So think about that for those families.

Um when my daughter was in first grade and my son was in pre-k that meant six trips there and back again in the morning there and back at noon for prek and there and back in afternoon for pickup.

But it was worth it for me because the community school is so special. And that is a word I want to emphasize. This is a community school. Without Panel Elementary School, Panel will cease to function as a community. This is a community um a community. Mayor Casey Tinken, an associate professor at education at Bates College, wrote an article on the impact on closing of rural schools. Now, I will understand that you're not closing our school altogether, but reconfiguring it.

However, you will be closing our community school and turning it to something different. So the the uh the impact she cites in her article can be applicable. Quote, "Although schools are often closed to save money, there are few studies on whether this actually happens. The little research conducted so far suggests that savings are minimal at best at a time when fewer than one in five Americans live in rural areas. The demise of local schools can also lead to closures of local businesses and expedite population losses. Rural schools provide political power and they tie people together. Once the schools are gone, the community loses all of those benefits. There are smaller crowds at the diner and fewer seats on the school board. Property values may also decline. Close quote. Close quote. I do want to reiterate that I know you're not uh closing the school in the manner that these schools were closed. However, for Panel, it will have such the main same impact. In Panel, the school is how we get to know our neighbors. It is the core of the community and what holds us together. Without a school that is designated to serve Panel's families specifically, there will be a irrevocable repercussions in how we relate to one another, interact with one another, and serve one another. Without Panamel Elementary School, I would have never would have met my friend Malik Farlo, whose is my friend and whose childrens are friends with mine, but they wouldn't have been because they're in alternating grade levels. Without Pounder Elementary School, I wouldn't know most of my community members because either they had children in the school or had worked at the school.

Without Panel Elementary School, I would not have had the opportunity to serve as a community through the schools as I did for nine years as a parent volunteer, long-term substitute teacher, and regular substitute teacher. The teachers like Mr. Donahghue and his son, Mr. T, that have impacted my students in a way that will affect their lives forever, will be placed in pos other positions or will lose their positions entirely. I understand the reasoning behind exploring this decision. Funding our schools is an everinccreasingly difficult situation. However, rather than reconfiguring our town identity and firing teachers, I would rather see that we reallocate funds from elsewhere, I would rather see the money we spend on iPads or any other kind of excess be completely rerouted to our schools and our teachers. Surely, there are other avenues we can explore if we just think outside the box of what quote all the other schools are doing and look into what is actually best for our community.

I also understand the need for early integration in the school district. Having sent two children through panel, I saw both the benefits and drawbacks to being in such a small school, I still wouldn't change that experience for them. Their ability to get along with different personalities, serve their community, and have a strong sense of place and identity is rooted in Panel Elementary School. I urge you to reconsider this decision and the impact it will have on Panel's community and identity. Thank you, Julie.

My name is Kate Martins. I'm a Poundell resident and I have three children. My oldest is a first grader at PES.

Equity is a concept that resonates with me and it's a word I heard again and again when watching the board meeting on February 11th and again and again tonight. Before having children, I was a teacher myself and issues around equity were at the center of the work I did with students and families.

The way I've understood the term is as the recognition of individual differences and systemic barriers and the provider providing of tailored resources to achieve positive outcomes.

This is different from the concept of equality which simply provides every individual with the same things.

Walk in the door at PES on any day and you will see that it is a vibrant, energized and productive school. It is the heart. It is at the heart of the community in Panel. In fact, in many ways, it is the community in Panel. I feel that to maintain some kind of equity with other schools in RSU5, it is essential that Panel Elementary School continues to exist in its current format. The things that students need in Freeport are different than the things that students need in Panel or Durham.

Freeport has a library, coffee shops, the Y. Freeport has neighborhoods, sidewalks, and playgrounds. These are all places that build community identity. I grew up in Powell and recently moved back after 20 years away.

I love living in a rural place and my children do too. The fact that Panel is a rural town with few institutions means it relies heavily on its elementary school because the school is where community is made and sustained long term from preK to grade 5. perhaps the most formative years in our education system. To remove the school is to decide on behalf of the entire community that the primary structure and panel that builds lasting systems of education, socialization, and collaboration is no longer important enough to fund.

It feels both inequitable and unequal to remove this school and force current students, teachers, and staff to lose their sense of stability, belonging, and continuity in their education and work.

I urge you to think deeply about the implications of this proposal and the harm it will cause our children and our community as a whole. Thanks.

Thank you, Kate.

Okay, so that was everyone I had on my list. I will give a quick pause to see if there's anyone else who would like to speak.

I would. Thank you.

Good evening. My name is Bill Bogart and I'm a Palmer resident and I come to this from a slightly different perspective. I have no children or grandchildren in the school. They've never attended the school, but I am a Palinal resident and I recognize the significance of the school to the community. I'm going to take Superintendent Gray at his word when he made the presentation last week or week before that the needs uh for kids and families should always come first before financials. And if in fact that is true and that's what this board believes, you have no justification for closing the panel school. You're asking the smallest community in the district to send their kids from kindergarten through high school outside of their own community when you've heard, I hope, very compelling testimony from all the families whose children go there, how important it is for them to attend. And if in fact this is part of a solution to deal with equity issues between Durham Middle School and Freeport Middle School, if it's a concern about the three-year-olds and foury olds and this is just the consequence of that, then there are other ways to deal with those problems. But if in fact what's really driving this is a concern about inequality not equity between the cost of students or that this board thinks that panel school is too expensive to run then be honest about that and say that and then we can deal with that and how you deal with that as a budget issue. But if in fact this is just the result of imaginations to deal with the issues in the middle schools to deal with equity issues in extracurriculars then there are another ways to do it without closing the school because be being very clear pal will bear the brunt of these changes. The kids in Powell the hundred kids who go to school there are going to have a different experience than they have currently and a different experience than other kids in the district. and it's fundamentally not fair to them.

So if if you need to solve the problem in the middle school, there are a lot of Bright Mountains in all these communities who can help you deal with that. If you need to solve the problems with the three and four year olds and their integration into the system and early education, you can deal with that.

And so this does not need to be the result of that closing this school because you can hear how important it is to our community. Thank you.

Thank you, Bill.

Good evening. Um, my name is Ian Nichols. Um, we are, uh, my wife and I are panel residents and parents of a two-year-old who will soon enter RSU5.

Um, last night we read the planning for the future proposal and wanted to share our thoughts in tonight's meeting. Um, we do genuinely appreciate Superintendent Gray's commitment um to planning thoughtfully for the district's future. Uh, we know these decisions are hard and that uh the pressures facing RSU5 are real. Um, and we share the goal of ensuring that every child in this district has access to a great education. Um, Panel Elementary School is highly regarded and its reputation speaks for itself. Uh per the superintendent's proposed budget for 2627, enrollment has grown 18% since 2023. Um and we chose panel because of this school in this community and we believe that that growth deserves to be celebrated uh in central to this conversation um on the scenarios that were outlined.

Um we we believe scenario one is is absolutely the best path forward. Um before concluding that it is unworkable, we would love to understand how much space is actually needed for the early childhood requirement. Um and whether alternatives like portable classrooms or office re office reconfigurations were explored uh regarding the early childhood requirement. Our research indicates that this is in regard to main law 20- ma chapter 303 uh and the federal individuals with disabilities education act. Uh Maine is transitioning responsibility for early childhood special education to local school districts and phases. Uh this means that children with disabilities uh found eligible for an IEP between ages three and five need support. Um it's not a universal preschool requirement. The district already has space for four and 5year-olds with IEPs. So the challenge seems to be specifically about three-year-olds. So how many three-year-olds with IEPs are projected for 2027? How much space do they need?

Uh that number feels like the foundation of this entire conversation. Um scenario two and three both ask panel to bear a disproportionate share of the change. Uh we're requesting detail on what outcomes these scenarios are projected to deliver for students, for families, um and for the district's finances. So there are four questions that we hope the board will strongly consider. Um one regarding early childhood programming. what is the projected number of three-year-olds with IEPs for 2027 and how much space is needed? Uh that single data point would help the community evaluate whether these scenarios are truly necessary. Uh two, regarding middle school equity, what specific metrics demonstrate a meaningful gap between Freeport and Durham, uh we're hopeful that there may be ways to address any inconsistencies without full restructuring.

Uh three, regarding financial sustainability, um you know, we're excited about the opportunity for RSU5 to leverage, you know, modern productivity tools to drive efficiencies within its central office. Uh has the district examined whether it's uh whether it's spending on non-eing administrative roles is producing commensurate results for students? Um and four, lastly, regarding community identity, uh Panel Elementary School is the beating heart of a small close-knit community. We ask that proposals of this scale be accompanied by the facts, data, and studies needed to demonstrate uh that they've been rigorously vetted and are expected to deliver to deliver better outcomes for children. Um yeah, thank you for your time. Thank you, Ian.

Okay. So, thank you for everyone who um who came tonight and obviously for those who took the time um to share their feelings and their and their thoughts and their perspectives and there was a lot of great ideas. Um so, I just want to I just want to acknowledge that and thank everyone for doing that. I know it's not easy to get up and speak in front of a group. Um so, um thank you for that and we will continue on with our agenda.

Uh so we will move on to item eight which is the report from the superintendent.

Hi everybody.

I don't know how I can follow much of that. Um I'm not as eloquent as many many of the people who just spoke and some of my remarks tonight will be aimed at some of the questions that you have.

But I do have some other things to talk about too. Um, so the last time I gave a formal report was January 28th because they are usually reserved for the last meeting of the month, which this is. Um, there's been a lot that's happened since then. Um, there's been budget work obviously. There's been this conversation about longerterm possibilities for district configuration. There's the strategic plan, which had a really um, thoughtful presentation from Maria and some other board members last time we met.

And there's the weather, which has kind of made its presence known lately. Um, I'm going to start with the weather. It usually seems like a safe conversation starter. Um, as of today, we have used five four of the five snow days that we have built into the school calendar. Um, and we're about halfway through winter, although it feels like there's still a lot of winter left.

Halfway about about It's Maine.

Um, so understandably I'm getting questions at this point about what are we going to do if we exceed the five days. Um, nobody wants to be in school on the 4th of July. So I wanted to tell the board and the public we are looking at options and we've been talking about these options and I want there's uh well I've asked for an adjustment to the agenda tonight to talk about the school calendar. So the options that I'm going to share with you now are what the team and I have discussed as the most reasonable path forward with this. Um the first thing is I'm going to ask you tonight to change the school calendar to convert the March 13th professional learning day which is a teacher day but a non- studentent day to a half student day. Um that gets it to count as a whole day and it makes up a snow day. and we can condense the PD down to a half day and it seems to be the best choice that we can make at the moment, at least from my perspective and the team's perspective. Um, we've looked into operationally what we can do to make that work. Um, we can do it with minimal disruption. So, if you approve that change tonight, that is not a done deal because it has to be then approved by the commissioner of education. But I have got that application ready to go as long as I get a vote and I can click send and hopefully get a yes on that. So assuming that is granted right now our last day of school is Tuesday, June 23rd for kids, that would scale it back to Monday, June 22nd.

So that's one day. That would mean we've basically used three snow days. Um I don't think it's done snowing though.

So, um, the next thing we've talked about is, okay, what's the next what's the next plan? Um, we talked about remote learning days, which have not been a practice in this district for some time since CO. Um, when I arrived here last summer, I asked about whether that was a practice here. It is in some districts, it's not in others. I was told pretty emphatically that that was a practice that was deliberately moved away from after the pandemic. Um I I get it. I support that actually. Um the reasons for that are both instructional and logistical. Um remote learning is not the same as in-person learning. It's ju it is just not it is a poor substitute. Um so and that is particularly true the younger the kids get. Um and it's also a real burden for for working families to have to make up to, you know, do a remote day.

So that said, what we're weighing, boy, we're all it's all about like what's the path, what's the what's the best way to thread a needle, and that seems to be the nature of my job these days. Um, we're weighing that against not wanting to be in school on the 4th of July. So, we are looking right now at a school year that ends past the summer sto solstice already, even with making it up with the March uh PD day.

So I am proposing that we keep remote days in reserve and I am going to suggest that we use them if we get past five days. So rolling past that March day would bring us back to three. That would give us two more days.

And if we get to two more days, that would mean the last day of school is Wednesday, June 24th.

And then if we got to a sixth snow day, we would kick in with remote days. and we are putting the plan in place to make that work.

Here are the other options that we could do. Um, I'm going to tell you right now, they're just far less desirable. Um, we could lengthen the school day by an hour for a week. That's five hours. That is enough to gain back one day.

That has been done in this district in the past. Something I've lived through in the past. Is it fun? No. Is it good?

Is that last hour of day of the day really good learning in a first or second grade or even a 12th grade classroom?

Nope. Um, does it disrupt sports? Does it disrupt everybody's schedule? Yes. Is it highly problematic? Yes. Can we do it? Yes. Um, the other option is you can have school on a Saturday.

Um, I've lived through that, too. Um, again, not fun. You have to make sure that enough kids actually come so that you can count it as a day. It's not a great option. It is something in the arsenal. I think it's better for us to use remote days, but to keep them in reserve and go out the full five days that are accounted for on our calendar as it exists. So, that's what I'm that's sort of like the plan for the weather.

So part of that involves you voting tonight on the March PD day and then if we have to go to remote days, I would need to have you vote on that as well, but I'm going to save that for the next meeting. That the voting on remote days is not on the agenda tonight.

Okay. So the budget um talking about just next year's budget, not the longer term budget, we have time on the agenda to discuss this more deeply tonight. Um I want to provide some context for that conversation. Colin had asked a question I think it was Colin at the last meeting about um what would happen going forward not just next year but the year after that and the year after that if we keep the budget as a status quo budget or if we make reductions.

So to project that far forward, it gets much less precise as you go out each year and it's also a heck of a lot of work. And I have to tell you that Kelly is I didn't do that work. Kelly Wentworth has done that work. Um so kudos to Kelly who has really been doing a lot for our district lately. But I asked her to project what our budgets would look like out through FY29. So that's three years if we in two scenarios. One is if we keep status quo budget with no reductions and the other is if we make reductions at the level that I recommended which is that tier 2 level. So again reckoning that these are estimates and imprecise and less precise the further you go out I do have some information for you. So without reductions, the projected increases for next year, that's fiscal year 27, is 10 point about 10 and a half% which is not new information to you. But then if we go out to fiscal year 28, it's another 8 and a half%.

And if we go out to fiscal year 29, it's another 8.9%.

And that assumes lots of things. It assumes, for example, that the raises across the board for staff are going up at the level that they are going up.

Now, we have not we have a teacher contract to negotiate in the middle of all that.

We're negotiating a support staff contract now. Who knows what's happen what happens with other things in the world. So, those are projections.

Um, this contrasts with the way it would look at the recommended level.

my recommended level. If you accept that proposal, it comes in at about six and a half percent for next year, which is again not new information.

The year after that, it comes in at about 5.6%. And the year after that at about 5.9%.

Are those still significant increases?

Yes. Um there are towns that are nearby our district that have been flat for a long time which means effectively a reduction every year. Um so those are still significant increases but I would suspect that they are more likely to be within the range that we can responsibly present to the community.

Um so again those things those are not hard and fast figures. Please don't, you know, hold hold me to to those as time goes on. There are best estimates at the current moment.

So, and last, I want to talk more about the ideas that got shared two weeks ago.

And I have a little script here for myself that I always make and I always sort of loosely follow it, but I'm going to go off of it for the moment. And I just want to say that I'm sorry genuinely.

This is really hard. Um, and I have nothing but the most most respect for Palol, the school, the community. Um, I didn't come here with the idea of wanting to disrupt a community school. I did open this up because in my opinion, anything that is not talkable is toxic.

And these are ideas that I've since I arrived here six, seven, eight months ago, whatever it was, I've realized have been talked about in the margins since before I got here. And it is the moment now that they come out into the open and get discussed here in the board and with the community with full participation. I think the comments that I heard tonight were about the healthiest public conversation I've heard in a long time. I didn't hear a single disrespectful comment. I heard productive, heartfelt comments and I don't know what the decision will be but that is commendable and I respect it.

Um it is clear that um this has generated strong feelings and that is understandable and as I said when I presented identity is a non-quantifiable factor and it's impossible for us to know how much it should weigh in the decision until the idea is put out there and we see how it lands in the community. Um, I want to emphasize that there is not going to be there cannot be a decision about this tonight or the next board meeting or anytime soon. This is a conversation starter. It is not a conversation ender because you don't have enough information to make a decision yet. A lot of the questions that were raised here were completely valid questions.

The scenarios that I presented two weeks ago were the three scenarios that have emerged since we started really talking about it at the administrative team level in a in the few months since I've been here. There could be any number of other ideas that surface. Um my intention is to knowing how much effort and investment it takes to actually flesh out any scenario. It takes investment not of just of time but of district resources, money to actually figure out how to go forward. And one of those is something I'm going to ask you about tonight as well. So my intention two weeks ago was to make the conversation open and make the topic talkable and to see if it even want if we should go forward with any conversation. I am still hearing that that conversation needs to go forward.

there a lot of conversation needs to go forward.

So here are what I think the next steps should be. Um the first step is really what we're doing tonight, which is just that a community had a bombshell dropped on it and there needs to be a lot of space to listen and to just allow for the feelings that naturally come up around that and the ideas that surface around that. That's not just a this board meeting thing. That's an ongoing thing. Um, so in addition to public comment like tonight and the opportunity to email the board, I do think we should consider some structured opportunities through the rest of this school year for community input. Um, that is sound information for the board.

Um, I have personally offered to go to the select boards in Powell and in Durham.

I'm in the process of trying to get those scheduled. I understand. I heard yesterday that I I've been in particular going back and forth with the town clerk in Pel to try to figure out a time that works. I understand that it appeared on the town calendar that I was coming there like Monday or Tuesday, but that was a mistake and then it got removed and it looked like somehow I'd can I didn't cancel a meeting. We just haven't figured out when I the schedules line up yet. Um Oh, where was I? Let's see.

what happens when you go off script.

That is what happens when you go off script. Um, second, I there's some concrete information that you need to be able to make this decision that we just don't have yet. Um, one of the best ways we could get that is through an objective facial facility study by an architectural firm. That is something that I've seen done in other districts that faced this issue. um particularly in RSU3 where I was a few years ago um that faced the closure of two small schools very much like Po. Um, a facility study is going to provide a very detailed and professional analysis of the infrastructure of the district, each building, the capacity of each building, the highest use of those spaces, how much we're paying for them, what the infrastructure in those buildings would cost, and what its expended light life expected lifespan is, and how else they could be used. So that's the kind of insight that we need far more than what the admin team and I can think of um during our rich and you know informed discussions on this topic but professionals who specialize in that are going to be able to give you much more uh specific information.

So, I'm going to ask you to actually approve some money from Capital Reserve tonight so that we can move forward in putting a facility study out to bid um because that's a process that by itself takes months just to get that going. And then in the nearer term, I just have some uh I have some advice for the members of the board. And it is simply that I really think each of you needs to reflect on the values that should drive the decision.

It's going to be a different mix for each of you. And it's not going to be one value. It's going to be multiple values.

Um it's not for me to tell you what they are. It's for you to decide what they are. It's for the community to decide what they are. Is it equity? Is it community sentiment? Is it a long-term vision? I those are things that have kind of come up. But I think that's what you need to think about now and give yourself think, time, and thought partners in that process. What values will come to bear on your decision and how you will vote?

Um because as I mentioned before and I've had some training in ethical decision-making and I I want to dig a little deeper into a a thought that I laid out last time. An ethical dilemma is not a right versus wrong situation.

That's a moral dilemma. An ethical dilemma is when you have two things that are right in and of themselves and they come into conflict with each other. It's a right thing versus another right thing. and somewhere one of them has to give and that's what you have here. And um ethical dilemmas typically fall into four paradigms. By the way, those four paradigms are truth versus loyalty.

Are you going to tell the truth about what your friend did or are you going to remain loyal to your friend? Individual versus community.

Long-term versus short term. and justice versus mercy. I won't go into more detail than that, but I'm sure you can think of a million situations in which you have two right values and they come into conflict with each other and they fit somehow into one or more of those paradigms.

Certainly, this decision that we have about what how to go forward as a district touches on more than one of them.

So, I'm going to suggest that at some point this before this school year ends, we dedicate some time to awaited uh to discussing the values that should underly this decision. And that is not a binding conversation. It's not a vote, but it's letting the thought process and the feeling process play out in front of the community, which the community deserves.

Um because our responsibility is to just be transparent about the tensions between those values and how we see them and in the end how you vote based on them. And my role is not to decide that.

My role is to help frame this discussion and to provide the information that you need and to do my best to facilitate a thoughtful and open process. And the decision itself is yours.

That's what I got tonight. Okay, thank you.

I do have a couple of resignations to announce. Um, Meredith Hook, uh, the librarian at Moore Street School and Pel has resigned and Jeremy Arsenal, the director of transportation, has resigned effect at the end of the year.

So, we have just posted for a new director of transportation and that will be a big his are big shoes to fill and I believe an email went out to the community if folks are interested in being on that hiring committee.

Yes.

Yes. So, check your emails if you're interested in in being involved in that.

Uh, okay. So we will move on to item nine which is administrator reports and um we have Sean Shabbat from Region 10 Technical High School. Um welcome Sean.

Thank you for coming back. Thank you for having us.

We have some slides that I'd like to share with the board and the public and there are some handouts too if anybody in the audience would like to see it.

Yeah.

Usually there's plenty of chairs, not this evening. So again, thank you for having us here tonight. Uh Civil Brewer, our school uh business manager, is with us um and helped create a lot of this work that we did for you tonight.

This first information is our region 10 4-year enrollment increase over the past four years. And you can see with a totality of we have gained nearly 40% enrollment over the past four years at region 10 between the three sending districts. So, our numbers have grown substantially from 285 in 20 uh 2223 to we're just over 400 as we stand today. And we anticipate next year being up close to 450.

And then the next slide, please, is the four-year enrollment of Freeport High School students.

And you can see those are yearbyear. and the the the total number is nearly 80% uh more students from Freeport High School attend region 10 than they did in 2223.

So I just give that as some context for our budget presentation tonight. Um that our numbers certainly are increasing and that's a positive thing. Um and we support that. Obviously that's good for students and CTE certainly um career and technical education that's an acronym that we all use in education has grown in popularity and I think folks in the communities of all three districts see the value across not only the our sending districts but across the state and across the nation of career and technical education.

So the next slide is our proposed budget that we presented to our finance committee back in the middle of February.

And then we had another meeting this past Monday night with our finance committee and our full school committee, our cooperative board, which Valerie and Colin both sit on. And we discussed um our proposed increases. And of note, you can see the um we made some cuts um from our initial entry of what we collected for information from our staff. Um with that given given that increase in enrollment um initially we felt like we needed to add more ed tech support for those students and um we're simply not able to do that and still be be responsible. So, we had cut the one and a half edtech positions from our budget. We had looked at increasing our EMT program from a half-time program to a full-time program.

And um while the numbers were probably going to be there, it wasn't a guarantee at this time. And so, we've kept it like that. And then we had one vacancy that we filled and we were able to make some vacancy adjustments. And then you can see on that list in blue the associated other adjustments that we reduced the budget. Um and we came in at just just over 8.6%.

Which is more than we would like to be to be quite frank. I was um shooting for more like five or six% and um without negatively impacting students um the board was pre the finance committee was pretty clear with me um that they weren't going to support that because what the next cut was going to be um student supplies, instructional materials and supplies. And in a CTE environment, you can well imagine you cannot do culinary arts without food.

Or you can't do a carpentry, what we call building trades, without lumber or metal fabrication and welding without welding materials. And if you built a house or remodeled your house or go grocery shopping every week over the past couple of years, you know the cost of that. And we face those same costs.

In addition, region 10 was built in uh 1983 and our building is aging like lots of schools around the state. Um we applied for a school revolving renovation fund grant and that's the next slide. Um and that that while we didn't get everything we asked for and most like most most people nobody ever gets everything they want. Uh they the state did cost share um our upgrade to our fire panel that needs to be upgraded. And if you've been to region 10 and you come into the building um we have a camera and you get buzzed in from the foyer, but there is no visual line of sight besides the camera for allowing people to access the building. And in my in my opinion and others, that's not the best safety. Even though we have a camera and a door locking buzz system, uh we would like to put in a a pass through window. So that way when visitors come or guests come, we can put eyes on visually. And sometimes you can just limit that interaction of actually coming in the building by passing through a child left their book at home or something needs to be passed through um from the outside and you don't need to allow that person into the building. So those two uh upgrades were approved by the state and that local share increased the cost uh cost share up to 9.63% that you see there.

And then the next page is some of our largest budget drivers. As was mentioned before in the previous discussion, salaries is one of our main um cost drivers like every school budget. um our salaries are up near over 10%.

Our our collective bargaining agreement with our instructors takes the weighted average of our three sending districts.

So whenever you do RSU5 does a collective bargaining agreement with your teachers that directly impacts our teachers as well. Our teachers receive the weighted average of the three sending districts to be fair. Uh we also have five vacancies. We have retirements coming up, which is unusual for region 10. Usually we have folks stay until they retire, but this year we unfortunately have a couple of five vacancies coming up and they're all retirements. Um, and when when you have a small staff, you have to budget for the high end. We can't do an average of some some will some folks coming in at high, some low. We have a smaller budget um smaller number. So we budget for the high end of the scale and full family because if we hire somebody and then they have a family, we have to pay those medical benefits in that which makes sense. So that costs we have to budget for that. Um we are starting our HVAC program. Uh we tried to do that a few years ago. Um and it wasn't successful.

our instructor that we had hired left after a couple months and we moved the children us children students high school students into other programs. But this year we feel confident fingers crossed that we'll be able to hire instructor and the um we've been doing our recruitment um for the past couple of months and that program is nearly full between the three districts.

So that's that's positive. Um you can see our average teacher instructure instructor is a nearly a 7% average increase and that's a direct result of those collective bargaining agreements and our budgeting for health insurance and dental insurance is we budgeted we put a placeholder of 12%. I know some districts around are doing 15%. Um we were at 10% last year and so we felt like it was comfortable to be at 12.

Then you can see the SRRF loan payment if the voters approve that. And then with an aging building, um we are facing other repair costs for that building.

And we maxed out that budget line early in the fall this past year. And so we anticipate probably more things. If you own an older home, you know what I'm talking to. Um, and then the last page, smaller print, and again, there's extra copies over here if anyone would like to look at it in more detail. It's a three-year comparison of the region 10 budget. Um, so you can compare year-over-year.

There's enrollment numbers in there. Our projected enrollment of next year of nearly 450 students. And new this year, we also put in a cost per pupil. Um, and that is not to compare region 10 cost per pupil. I just want to be clear to any school district. We don't have a central office. We don't have transportation costs per se. We don't have a nutrition department. We don't have special education, English language learners, um, where we have a whole programs for that. So to compare our costs and say how come other districts are so much higher, it wouldn't be apples and apples. We put it on there to to demonstrate and hopefully uh show that our cost per pupil per year has gone down over the past three years. So the point of that is I think we're doing a a decent job of trying to do um more w um with as without asking the taxpayers for additional revenue as as much as possible trying to be good stewards of your taxpayers dollars. So you can see in there that region 10 of overall um your school district's budget is still at less than 1% of your overall budget and our goal is always to remain under 1%. So we hopefully find you feeling like that is a good value for your high school students to gain that career and technical education.

And I'm happy to answer any questions that you may have now or anytime in the future.

every time by find myself. Thank you, Sean.

Uh, questions for Sean. Okay, thank you.

I have some. I just try to open it up to them first. So, I give them a second first. Um, a couple of questions. One, um, the the loan piece, the um, the surf loan. Yes.

Is this similar to what was done in for the bridge a couple years ago where there's a separate question on the ballot for that?

Yes, it's exactly the same process, the same loan, same loan program, if you will. And so our board has tentatively given us the thumbs up to move ahead with that and they don't approve our budget until the March school cooperative board meeting which is what the 16th 16th. Um but yes if that's approved it will go out to referendum in the June primary along with the other warrant articles for supporting of the schools.

Okay great um and that's a zero interest loan from the state. Yes, it's a 0% interest loan from the state. Thank you for that question. I should have said that. U would kill me if I walked away without saying that. Uh 0% interest loan of the state and nearly 50% 47 I'd ask it's in my notes nearly nearly 50% 47 point I can't remember exactly is forgiven by the state. So we have to pay just over 53 just under 53% and the other remaining balance is forgiven.

Okay, great. Thank you. Uh, and I know this is a primarily a budget discussion, but you're here, so I'm going to ask away.

And you probably know what I'm going to ask, which is, you know, the discussion around um uh a centralized um regional technical school that's full-time.

Sure. Uh so as you know and we've talked about in the past that region 10 has explored the option and we did a feasibility study similar to what you folks are talking about for buildings but this was is could a 4-year comprehensive high school comprehensive that was the word.

Yes. Could a 4-year comprehensive CTE school be feasible? And we did that work hired an outside consultant presented it to folks. um it was but in order for us to move forward with anything like that there needs to be legislative changes in Augusta um by state statute we don't issue diplomas region 10 CTE schools don't do that the sending schools obviously do that so until there would be state statute changes that is still a goal of ours um it was a clear goal that the cooperative board set for me when I arrived at region 10 and we've worked towards that um but that is something that until um legislative changes occur in Augusta that will not take place. You can't move forward.

Yeah. So we just to continue with that thought just for a second we are maintaining that and mo trying to move forward with that but at the same time on a parallel track working to grow options for students within the CTE traditional umbrella that we've always had. So, we're doing two parallel tracks at the same time. Well, based on the enrollment figures, it looks like you're doing a great job with that. So, thank you. Certainly not me. It is the team that we have at at region 10. It's a good team.

And the percentage um that is allocated to the sending districts. How often is that? Is it every year that we figure out the percentage that each sending district has? Is it a fixed amount that's looked at every so many years based on the cooperative agreement which is based on the US census of the three of the total population not the student population the total population of the three sending district sending districts. Got it. Thank you.

So it's every 10 years. Yes. You may have answered this in the past.

This is my second board meeting. So are there a number of slots that are allotted to each of the school districts that are part of your school or if suddenly a hundred more kids wanted to come from Freeport that would be available for them?

The answer is no to that for 100 more students. Uh so yes to your first part of that question based on the cooperative agreement and you can see those percentages based for the percentage of participation for the the rates um on the bottom of your chart um is roughly Brunswick is at 38.17 MSAD75 which is 36.44 and RSU5 which is 25.39.

So every year with the slots that are open for new students, we divide those out based on that percentages and we have an admissions process that we work with our all the sending school counselors, the sending school principles to discuss that. We try to be very transparent with the number of slots per program that are available for each of the sending schools. um an enrollment for what we call phase two closes actually this coming week and then we meet as a team with each school to discuss how many slot again how many slots they have the list of students that they would like to help prioritize for those slots and then after that takes place in mid-Marchch then whatever number of slots is open at that time is a rolling emissions sort of first come first serve until all the slots are full. Does that answer your question? Maybe.

Yes, it does. Um, yeah, I think I'm well set. Thank you.

So, yes, we try to proportion out slots initially for every sending school based on that percentages and then if they're not filled, it's a rolling admissions sort of like college. So the extra 50 slots next year that you're anticipating is that the HVAC program that we not the it's not a 50 slots that's the our anticipated number of students that will attend region 10. We could take up over 500 total but we anticipating being at 400 about 450 students.

I see. And is it because of the HVAC program? That's one of the reasons. Yes. Okay. Thank you.

Valerie, thank you Sean for your presentation.

Um, as you might imagine, most of it is familiar to me. Um, I was hoping you could speak a little bit to the board because I've mentioned it a few times, but I thought it might be worth coming from the horse's mouth. Um, the expansion transition to the landing.

Oh, yeah. Thank you. Um, so this past Thank you for that question, Valerie. Uh this past year we partners we partnered with Main Maritime Academy at the landing the old naval air sta station at Brunsw in Brunswick. Um main maritime signed a long-term lease with um the reality group that owned the old commissary building which was the wayfair building for a number of years and they have turned that into a learning center. We started our a new program called pre pre-engineering architectural design there this year where students are earning main maritime credit um concurrently and we're looking at and the board approved the plan to expand further into on that base and add um our HVAC program over there move our electrical program over there our pre-apprenticeship program and our IT cyber security that would open up space in our main building because we do have a portable out front that they uh brought in during the COVID um time during the pandemic. And it would allow us to because our lease is up on our portable, our 5-year lease to decommission that, get rid of that, and so we would no longer be paying that payment for the lease. and the money we were paying for the portable would go for um leasing out the space with Main Maritime. So, that's been a great partnership with them. The students have done a great job. It seems to have gone really well. So, we're looking to expand there. If that continues and works well, we'll look at the possibility of further expansion on there. We're our classrooms are completely full. uh we cannot expand any more inside the building region 10 building without looking at other opportunities and we wanted to leverage Main Maritime who have been nothing but great partners BIW who has supported us and um the space that they have over there. So we're trying to make it a win-win for everyone.

Any other questions for Sean?

happy to come back anytime you'd like us. Thank you.

I know last year we had a tour for region 10 for was that last year that the board did that? I think it was two years ago.

Was it a two year? It was great. So if I don't know if people are interested in that, but it was very very um educational for me to see the you know um you're more than welcome. You can come see the new bridge in that new entrance there when we did it. That's right.

That's right. Thank you very much. Thank you. Thank you.

Okay. So, Kelly, finance.

A little shorter than Sean. Uh, good evening. In your board packets tonight, uh, the in your purple sheet. Oh, I think Jenny's still color coding. Yes.

In the purple sheet, um, are your expenditures through January 31st, 2025 for the current budget year, budget to actual. I was just reviewing where we were last year at this time and our percentages are um strangely identically on um so we are about um 56.5% collected on the revenue side and we are for expenditures we're uh 91.8% expended and encumbered. I don't see any issues within um the budget lines at this time. Um and uh so as far as the local budget's concerned, we do we did talk this evening um and we'll talk a little bit later. Um I don't know if you want me to mention it now, Michelle, that um there's a proposal that you'll see tonight. Um there have been some unfunded positions within the special education department. We've had them advertised all year. Um haven't been able to fill them. So that's allowing us to have some additional monies available within um article 2, which is our special education line to help facilitate um the position that you will be considering a little later and I'd be happy to talk about that later when we come up. Um but um the proposal from the superintendent tonight regarding the facility study um needed to continue the work for the future of RSU5 um that is actually being proposed to come out of the capital reserve account um which sits outside of the local budget not reflected in these questions for Kelly and just in case anyone gets like you know anxiety hearing that we've collected 56% of revenues and expended 91 1% of expenses. Um, that's encumbrances, too. So, for full year salaries and things we know we're going to pay for the full year, we encumber those early. So, we are not we're not out over our skis, as some might say, right? And, you know, our revenue sources are pretty solid. Um, we um we're funded through taxation and state subsidy. So um while it we do receive them on a u monthly basis both the subsidy and the taxation amounts from each each of the uh participating communities. So um so it's in line for where we would actually be um normally right and we haven't spent 91%. We just know we will spend it so we kind of set it aside.

Correct. Yeah.

Um you'll you notice that when you when when we f when we do our first report out in September and we've have encumbered all of the returning staff salaries and benefits. Um that's when you really see that percent um encumbered and expended change.

Y thank you.

Okay. Board comments and committee reports. Uh, so board information exchange and agenda requests. So this is where I'm going to look to Anna if she wanted I think she wanted to share something on a committee uh a committee meeting. She wanted to provide an update. So I apologize.

It was fine. Um, I was just wondering, so the curriculum committee, which is right now just me and Karen, we've been meeting about once a month, sometimes a little bit more, which from my understanding, previously curriculum committee was only meeting like twice a year. Um, and it just seemed to make good sense to share what we've been learning. Um, if it would make sense for us to kind of have a time to give an update.

Yes. So, I think any committee that wants to in this point um can always do that. Um, but we can also add it like we have facilities and finance like if you if you think it would be helpful to include that there.

Yeah, that would be great. And just to share quickly what we did, we met two weeks ago, Karen. Is that right? Yeah.

Um, and we spoke about um, NextGen Science and learned a little bit about our science curriculum and um, it's really interesting. We've also talked about math. That's a big um, priority area right now for the curriculum. Um, and I did make a request to learn about our reading curriculum as well, and we'll just keep sharing updates as we continue to meet.

Great. Thank you. So, I'm just going to look to Lois because we were talking about curriculum committee and um, as a as a new board member, we were going through orientation and committees and I I think I told her that or the sheet said they you guys meet like three times a year. So, I said, I think there's only one more for the year, but it sounds like there might be more. So, if you're interested, maybe I'll find out how many more.

That's true. Maybe one was a was a selling point as opposed to monthly. Fair enough. Um, great. Thank you. Uh, so then I will I found out at the finance committee that I'm apparently I'm the chair of that committee. Did I miss that meeting? Is that what happened?

That is what usually that's what happens. you get you get nominated for something. Um so I will just quickly go over the finance committee minutes from our January meeting. Um you know primarily because this was the meeting where the original budget um the superintendent's budget was presented to the board. Um uh Kelly and Tom provided us with um the proposals that were going to be presented to the full board that evening. Um, and so we just got a little bit of a little bit of a sneak peek before that and were able to ask some initial questions and and prompt some um some feedback. Um, we met again tonight.

Um, and um, but I don't have the minutes for that yet. So, you'll just have to wait and see next meeting.

I mean, I know, but I I you don't have the paper in front of you. So, Kelly already told you some of the stuff we talked about because it's going to be coming back shortly with the um facility study and the uh early childhood education. So, I will send it to Kelly for facilities facilities and operations committee met on Wednesday, February 11th. And as many people know, the FHS tennis courts have been on our minds quite a bit lately, especially since they have been officially um condemned for play. So, it's really important that we move forward with a plan to get them uh replaced quickly.

Uh, director Reynolds updated the committee that the contract for design services was signed and our um vendor CHA has scheduled this or I guess it was completed on 218 although we haven't gotten core sampling yet. That's the next step before we move forward with the tennis court design phase.

the energy audit phase one. Um Glenn updated the committee that the lighting project has been completed at Panel Elementary School in the district office and the lighting vendor is or is working in the middle school right now and then we'll after that move to the Mass Landing School to replace the lights with new LED um energy efficient lighting.

Okay, very good to know. New lights are really great. director says superintendent. Okay. DCS Automation. Um Glenn said that the contract has been signed and our vendor EMC has bid out the project to um and it has been a awarded to Main Controls. So that project will be moving forward soon. And f uh actually not finally, we have a couple more things. We have we had a guest come and give us some feedback. I'm going to skip to that really quickly. Molly Meyer, she's our FHS tennis court co uh I'm sorry, tennis coach, and she shared some information um regarding the application for the USA grant that uh will be important for helping us offset the cost for the new tennis courts. So Molly provided the committee with some documentation showing what information will be needed for the approval of the grant and also shared that the grant would be estimated um to be awarded at between 25 and $35,000 per court for a maximum amount of $150,000.

Okay, back to the baseball dugout roof.

Um, we've had some money donated by our boosters for the replacement of the baseball dugout roofs. There are two roofs that need to be replaced at the baseball dugouts at Freeport High School. And they uh estimated cost for the replacement is about $3,000. The new roofs will be the same as the current ones. They are metal and so that makes it easy if the dugouts themselves need to be replaced, which will happen sometime in the future, it will be easy enough for us to just reuse the metal roofs and put them on the new structures. So, they are planning on replacing those roofs by mid-March before the baseball season begins. And that's about all we talked about.

I think the um metal roofs that they're putting in are the same as the current the new ones that were done in the softball fields. I don't think the current baseball fields are metal if I'm correct.

I'm I'm seeing him nod. So, um they've replaced the softball ones a few years ago when they redid the field and those ones are metal. Okay. Yes, I do. They will match. Yep.

So, they'll match the ones that are on the soft football fields now. And then the other thing, I don't know if we mentioned this or not because what the last time when we were talking about the tennis court update and we had the vote to initiate the uh engineering work, there was some discussion around adding asking the um the engineer if they could provide us with some costing information for both of the two different types. Um and they have agreed to do that at no additional cost. Um, we won't get full prints or or plans for any projects until we pick the one that we want, but we will get general costing for both types as well as whether we can have three or we currently have three, whether there's the ability to add the fourth court. Um, so all of the work that they were already going to provide, um, they'll they'll give us the option of what they both look like and then when we decide which way we want to go, then they would draft up sort of full bidding documents to get a full cost estimate.

Is it realistic that that's going to be able to be the tennis court revamp done by for next season? So, next season being 27.

Yeah. Yes. That's what we're told. Okay. Yeah. I got a shrug from the back. So, it my understanding is they're hoping to be done no later than September. Is that correct, Glenn? September, October, hopefully. So, it may not be ready for the middle school season, but for the high school season, it looks it looks likely.

Yeah, it's tough with the weather.

Is that our timer that we're done talking? Yes. Um, any other questions on the facilities update? Cara, can you say again what the DCS automation replacement is?

What is that? Uh so the system that they use for the swipe cards what that was put in when they built the school 15 16 years ago.

Actually that right that's not it. That's not it.

No it has to do with the climate control in the building. Oh I lied. And it's the Glenn's now nodding. Yeah.

It has to do with Oh just come and tell us managing the flow of the air within the building so that it's efficient and it's going to where it needs it.

I don't think he believes you because he's coming up to talk. Oh, he's right. Yeah, it's the building automation system that runs the HBAC, your boilers, uh, ventilators and so forth. So, yep, we just installed it here at the high school and also at the middle school.

So, it's a new So, it's not something that failed from the original.

It is over at Durham. Yes, that's failed and that's what we're we just signed the contract for and that's going to be installed. Okay.

We had projected in the energy audit to do that in in the next phase, but it's failed. So, we moved it up to this phase because it needed to get done.

Okay. So, we knew it was coming. We just going to be a phase two. We just pulled it out. So we could do it now in phase one. By are these the pumps that are the the bane of Chris's existence or different thing entirely? That's the geothermal system. Yes.

Wait, those are the bane of Chris's existence. You don't like them? We just kept replacing them. Oh, and they got expensive. So that's what I talking about. This is the system that runs the pumps. Yeah. Okay. Yeah.

Okay. Other facil Thank you, Glenn. Other facility questions, comments. All right.

Moving on. Policy. Colin. Hey y'all. So, we met on Wednesday, February 5th, uh at 4:15 on Google Meet.

Um and we um were joined by a number of uh of administrators uh to discuss the two policies that we're bringing to you tonight for first read. Um we looked at um JIC which is student code of conduct um and JA uh compulsory attendance. Um and so we'll be talking about uh those a little bit later after we talk about the um second read. And just to note uh for our public I just I like seeing all of these people here. So, I'm just going to say that these policy meetings are open to the public. Um, and we encourage folks uh to attend. Um um and if they would like to attend, they can do so and uh bear witness to what we're doing. Um the public is not um uh permitted to speak at those meetings. Uh because we want anything that the public uh says to be communicated to the entire board because the policy committee has no uh power itself. Um, so we encourage folks to attend um and also to reach out with any uh uh thoughts that they have um to the board email.

That's a good point. We don't tell folks as often as maybe we could or should that all of committee meetings are open to the public uh but run along that same um same methodology. Um the policy I believe is the only one that's run virtually. All the others are in person.

Is that true? So, uh, but all of those agendas and scheduling is on the RSU5 website.

Want me to get a motion on the floor? All right. So, uh, we will move on to item 11, which is policy review. Do I have a motion for consideration and approval for the second read for the following policies? JIC K bullying and JIC KR bullying administrative procedure.

Kelly, thank you Steph. Great.

Um, so we're bringing before you JICK bullying and the associated administrative procedure JICKR. Uh, this is for second read. Um so at our last meeting um we uh presented you the work that we um had done in our previous policy meetings to bring um to make sure that um our bullying uh policy and procedures were um in alignment with all uh appropriate codes and also just cleaned up to make sure that they represent our best practice of what we're doing currently. Um there have been no changes made um to those policies since you saw them. So, we are asking for your uh approval of those uh tonight.

Okay. So, these uh we didn't have you changing anything on these. These are exactly what we saw last time, I believe. So, I don't we may have made some like periods and um there may have been some super pedantic things that Cara wanted us to uh get into, but um otherwise uh Cara does love the pedantic.

Hey, you need those people on every committee. Oh, I'm I'm very grateful.

Chris is going to up his up his pen in game. I have no I have no doubt. Just uh we're competing currently.

Any comments or questions?

Okay, we have a motion and a second on the floor. All those in favor?

None opposed? Thank you.

Um we're also bringing two um policies for um uh for first read. I neglected to mention that um in our um and this is for all of you but also for our our guests um that there are three reasons we will review policies. One is a law change, the other is part of a regular 5-year process and the other is uh at board request. Uh so these two policies that we're bringing before you JA compulsory attendance and GIC systemwide student code of conduct um those we are updating because of law change. Um so I'm going to just give you a kind of like top level um overview. Uh I'm not going to go through the actual document, but I'm going to give you some uh just some highlights of of what was changed to bring us into compliance with law. Um and then um if uh my colleagues on the committee would care to share anything or Tom if I miss anything. Um, please throw it in. So, let's look. What's the first one in the Is it Ja?

Yes, just in order. Okay. Um, blah blah blah.

Okay. Um, so basically the bottom line here is that we're updating this uh to reflect changes in current practice in main attendance and truency law. Um, and we're making the policy also internally clearer and more usable for us. Um and uh so a few things to note here. Um we are uh we're making some clarification around um sort of kindergarten rules um and compulsory age uh attendance. Um we also um were making sure that religious observances I think we we're making changes to religious observances. So now there is no pre-approval required by law um uh for religious observance. So we're making sure that that um is there.

Otherwise um we were just working on uh improving the logic uh of the the the policy itself and also making sure that the cross references um are accurate.

Um let's get a motion on the floor and then we can talk about them. How's that?

I already I already talked about it, but yeah. Okay.

No, I mean the No, I know. I know. I know.

Do you want to take a motion for these two together?

Yes, we generally Yeah, put We haven't talked about student, but does it matter to I just want to get it on the floor so we don't forget put it on the floor. Let's put it on the floor. Let's get into it.

Erica's itching to write it down. I can see it. All right, Erica. We'll do this for you.

Do I have a motion for consideration and approval for the first read for the following policies? J IC student code of conduct and JA compulsory attendance.

Cara, thank you. And Chris.

Okay. Uh, so you want to talk about questions for compulsory attendance first?

Yes. So just everything that I just said before I said just now. Said it now. And so now we can discuss it. Love that. Uh, questions.

Lois on page three of four in the um compulsory school attendance section. It's not really a question, it's a comment and I believe that maybe Cara is also an editor. Um there's a word missing under the section credit for attendance at a private school that's then been crossed out. Um the bottom line says from the private is filed. It should say in from the private school, I believe. I just want to make sure that the language is correct. Yeah. But what you don't understand, Lois, is that like I'm a poet, so like I can like I can break the language in like all sorts of different ways and like that sort of thing is just sort of acceptable. I know you're new here. Uh but that sort of thing is totally forgotten that for 40 years I used a red pen.

Exactly. Uh so can we please add uh school uh to that and it will be a slightly less interesting poem but a more accurate uh policy document. It is noted.

Other comments or questions?

Valerie on page two.

Um I had two. One is possibly pedantic. Um and I'll go to that one first because it's easier.

B5 at the very end. I can't tell what that punctuation is.

Is it a period, a colon, some semicolon? But why is it a semicolon?

Thank you. That's my question.

Again, it would be a cool poem, but let's make it a period.

I was like, what is this puzzle? Um, the other thing I was wondering is two just says parent or guardian. Do we need legal guardian or is guardian sufficient?

I believe guardian is our standardized language across the policies, but uh I'm going to defer to someone else.

Okay. And then I'll just plow right into my possibly final question. Um I noticed that in this document we call the district the school unit in many places.

Am I slow and just didn't notice before or is this the first document we've started doing this? Okay, so I am slow. That's fine.

Well, you may not have looked at all of them that I mean there's a lot of them.

It's fine. It just it reads funny to me and I it was I kept stumbling on it, so I wasn't sure if that's just the standard that we're using.

Okay, that's fine. Kelly, since we're going for pedantics, I might as well mention one.

um on page three of four. Actually, if you go to 204 and you look at the heading for number five, it says attendance at public day school days crossed out, but at the top of page three, it is not crossed out. If you'd like to be consistent and again, totally up to you, you might want to cross it out in the actual language, the very top line. Yeah, good catch.

Let day be stricken.

So maybe this falls into your poetry phase that you're in. Um that I'm in.

Um I'm curious about the super invalidating.

What? He just said he was um the first sentence was that from the lawyers like that seems very like so compulsory education is essential to the preservation of the rights and liberties of the people and the continued prosperity of our nation. Like that's very No, we just thought that was super cool, man. We just like we we came up with that ourselves. That was like off the dome. No, that was came from the lawyers from this this sample policy.

Wow. Okay. I mean I mean I guess I'm not opposed to it. It's just seemed like a very poetic big entrance to this policy.

All right. Just just also to say we uh we uh let me, you know, I'm going to use the I'm going to use the singular pronoun. I uh have been trying to take uh a note from Tom to sort of reduce the uh amount of kind of um beautifying uh that we do to the English language within the policies. Uh when we encounter when we encounter something like that, we're at we're trying to just kind of leave that alone. Um unless takes a lawyer to write it that way.

Yeah, it's really really really I mean I felt more poet than lawyer, but okay. What poems are you reading? None.

Okay. Uh other questions or comments on compulsory school attendance?

All right. You want to move on to the other? Yes, please.

Yes, please. Um, the next one is wait a second. Karen has a I think you're talking about the semicolons. Okay. So, yeah, page 204.

That's okay. Somebody else brought out the semicolons because it's one of the following sections, right? So, A has a semicolon at the end, B has a semicolon at the end, C does not, D does not.

So, either they all have Karen, this is a beautiful observation and I'm totally here for it. Um, let uh I don't care, right? So let uh let's make them periods. Let's make them periods. Sure.

Let's make them periods or we can take or you can trust the committee uh to in when we meet next time to have like a good solid discussion of that and full faith and trust in this committee to figure out the right punctuation.

Okay, great.

So I can say in good faith we we can adopt the policy. It's just first read.

So yeah, we can adopt we can move it forward and clean this up.

Absolutely. Yeah. We're not we're not tableabling this for semicolons.

Absolutely not. So Lord, Lord, help us. Okay.

All right. Systemwide code of student code of conduct.

Um, so this is uh systemwide student code of conduct. Um, and again, this uh this is bringing our uh code of conduct into alignment with the state laws um notably from 2021.

um and with really an eye toward um discipline limits for uh grades five and below. Um and also updating um uh protected class language. Is that accurate? Really is those two things, right, Tom? Um so, um how how much detail would you like me to get in to the substance of those? Because I can get into it if you would like me to. In other words, what the law now requires, just so everybody's clear about it. Would you like me to do that?

Uh, is the age defined like the ending at five fifth grade? Is that specifically defined in the law?

The uh grade is what is defined? Yes. So, it's not age, it's grade. Thank you. Yes.

It limits suspension and expulsion in students grades five and below. Um, which is a change in the law.

Um I I'm trying to figure out so on page two of nine the bottom there article five. So we created article five says ex or maybe it was already article five we just struck the e but so now it just says expectations but now everything else in that article has been struck. Well, then all the old stuff is gone.

Oh, this is all still article five. Oh, okay. Okay.

Yeah, good, good call. So, yeah, what is under article five is what we find starting on um the top of page five. So, that's violence, threats, weapons, hazing, discrimination, harassment, um etc. And this is as laid out by the law.

Yes. Uh yes, yes, my colleague to my right.

Thank you. Um I did have a question page five for weapons. It explicitly says knives and then says it elaborates that things that are not necessarily designed to be weapons. And I'm struck similarly with our uh cell phone policy and the non-in um items potentially being like a calculator instead of an abacus. Uh are we now banning like knives in the cafeteria? Like how like the other things firearms and explosives understandable. Probably no everyday use for those in the school. Um, knives, however, there could be. And is there is this a legal definition that we have to keep or are are we putting ourselves in danger of not allowing people to butter their toast?

This is from the sample policy that came from our attorneys. Um, and the intent here is to not prevent butter knives in the cafeteria, but to, you know, prevent a a makeshift shiv that some kid might bring in whittleled out of a I don't know, whatever.

Yeah. I mean, the way I read that is the distinction in the two sentences is that uh this is again weapons B on page five.

Students shall not possess or use weapons of any kind. So, it's the possession and use. And then the second is uh specifically use. So I think the first is basically saying don't bring weapons and then the second is saying don't use something as a weapon. If you do it will be treated as a weapon. So it's not saying if you have a butter knife it is a weapon. It's if you use a butter knife as a weapon you've weaponized it and therefore you will be uh responsible for that action.

Okay. Because I understand where you're coming from Valerie though. Like we literally put it as an example of things you can't have or use.

Yeah.

It's not in the like don't use it poorly.

We're a family that carries small knives as a a scissor replacement for things like cutting off tags and not, you know, stabbing people, but benign uses that probably would be banned in school. Not allowed. Yeah.

I mean, my kids don't currently carry knives. Um there's a principle in the back, right?

Then they are not currently in violation of the of the law. That is fantastic for them. Yes.

Uh so yeah, I mean again I think this is this is coming from uh the lawyers. This is the kind of language that just uh we in general do not mess with. Um because as soon as we start messing with it, it then creates something where if it is uh if it is beyond um what is legally um uh uh detailed um then we become uh liable for those changes. Um so I think I am not going to modify knives to knives except butter other than butter knives.

Um I think we need to keep knives as it is.

So I often struggle with these policies where we strike through multiple pages and add two new multi multiple pages. Um is there you mentioned the change in the fifth grade and below. Um are there any other material changes that we are either adding or removing? Um yeah, let me um um there's what could what should we say about the restorative um aspect, Tom? There definitely were um I made some notes that um uh that we're including positive and restorative interventions um before punitive steps. So that is just a an an important part of again it's we think it's an important part of what we should do as a school. It's also an important part of um bringing us into alignment.

Um the other is uh that the updated protected characteristics. Um and so that uh that list now includes race, color, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, religion, ancestry, national origin, and disability. So again, that is by law um what we are um protecting.

Um other you may remember thank you Jenny will thank you too. Um we adopted a policy earlier in the year that was to comply with the new law around restraint and seclusion. Yeah.

So this policy is congruent with that new policy. Um, as Colin mentioned, it adds gender identity to the protected characteristics which reflects the evolving civil rights landscape and it has limits on physical restraint and seclusion. It includes as permitted by law language throughout the document where appropriate and it um updates all the other policy cross references.

So, that was my last question is this I would say this policy has probably more cross references to other policies than any I've seen. Um, are we sure that all of those other policies have been updated to be in alignment with this?

We still No, we are not sure of that. Um, that is a good question. Um, I'm not sure.

Yeah, let's take a look at that. Let's just take a look at what what might be impacted there. I mean, again, the thing to remember for all of us um is that the law always trumps our policy, right? So, even if uh if like we make the changes to this and this is uh now accurately respect um uh reflecting policy, I'm sorry, reflecting law um and let's say we didn't uh update tobacco use and possession. Um but the law around that would still apply no matter what we have in the policy. Oh, absolutely. I agree. Yeah, that's for just the world. Um, you know, obviously like bullying, cyber bullying, we just looked at that one, so I'm going to presume that one's probably in alignment, but there's there's quite a few in here. Yeah.

And some of them are a little more um that is frequently looked at like bomb threats. Yeah. Um I think the other thing I just want to I I do want to actually just go through the grade five um the adjustments there just because they're like they're actually quite specific and I think they're just important. Um so um so the again there limitations on expulsions out of school suspensions and loss of recess for students in grade five and below. So that is the sort of the what has been um what has been changed. So um according to law um expulsion for grade five and below um is tied to federal uh gun-free schools act um and also the state policy around firearms. Um the out of school suspension for grade 5 and below is uh sharply limited. Um and but there's an exception for two things. One is for a gun-free schools act situation, a situation that falls under that. Um or uh quote imminent danger or serious physical injury uh and less restrictive interventions would be ineffective end quote. Um so those would be the two reasons um that uh the an out of school suspension um could be indicated. Um there's also a hard cap on out of school suspensions for um greater than three school days um which is important to note. Um and then also there are limits on recess withholding restrictions. So recess generally can't be withheld for K through5 discipline except when recess is the only available time for restorative interventions. And so the emphasis also there is on restorative and that was something that we um uh was clarified for us by some of the administrators who visited us for that meeting that was super helpful.

Yeah. Lo is it three days for each incident or three days a year?

Uh each incident.

Yeah. I'm pulling from I'm pulling from the law and it doesn't state in the law.

So I or it doesn't state in the language from the law that I'm pulling from. So I don't I don't know the answer to that.

So if you're saying for incident then that would be each incident.

Yeah. Because it says any out of school suspension which would be a specific incident. Yep.

Of grade five or below can be no longer than three school days. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Good call. Yep.

Other questions.

So it's not about the fifth grade. Can I go to a different question? Yeah, please.

On the same page, um, number 10 at the top of the page above discipline. Sorry, which page you on? I'm on page two of nine.

Two. Okay.

And it's actually I I'm actually looking at number nine, not number 10. It says, "Refrain from cheating or plagiarizing the work of others under the article three general behavior expectations." Um, how does AI play into this or is there a separate policy for AI plagiarism?

Uh, that's a good question. Uh, we currently do not have a separate policy for AI um plagiarism. I mean, we have we've had conversations um over the and we had a presentation earlier in the fall um about sort of the how how the school is uh working to both take advantage of AI where appropriate but also create limits uh where appropriate. Um, and my general understanding, um, is that, um, and I will also say this just as a teacher in case any of my students are listening, um, that it doesn't matter whether you're plagiarizing with AI or you're plagiarizing because Stephanie wrote it for you. You're plagiarizing and so that applies. So, I think that that um, and I will uh, go to the mat for that if anybody wants to come at me.

That would be my opinion, too. But it doesn't say anything about AI. I just worry that we're Yeah. No, I'm with you. I mean, I think um yeah, I don't know. What do you think, Michelle?

I don't know.

I mean, are you asking, do I think we should have an AI policy or should we include it here? I mean, I I think here the the generalized refrain from cheating and plagiarizing is appropriate in the code of conduct. And then if you know, maybe we're adding another cross reference here to another policy um in the future around AI. Um, but I think you know it comes down to teaching within our schools that just asking AI to write your paper for you is in fact cheating and plagiarizing and it falls under this. So, and I do believe that that is and I don't and I don't Yeah. And I guess I really don't I don't I have not heard a um uh for example there is that we had a really good um and rich conversation um around cell phone use uh in the schools and had some wonderful presentations from students who spoke really um eloquently about that issue.

Um in that case I would say that there is there is a question of um of sort of balanced interests and sort of different sort of points of view and opinions on that. I I have never encountered any um in any academic context anyone saying differentiating AI plagiarism from any other form of plagiarism. Um so plagiarism in my in my experience in encompasses um all of that. I don't think unless we define it somewhere else um because we would just be defining plagiarism which is using somebody else's words as your own as your own even if it's computers but we're definitely going to be returning to AI because that is a big concern of ours as a district and as part of our strategic plan it needs to be part of that um and so we're building off of the great work that was presented in the fall um but Good note.

Yeah, I think it's more likely something that gets embedded into the curriculum talking about that.

Other comments or questions? Okay, we have a motion and a floor. Wow.

A motion and a second on the floor. Uh, all those in favor? So, this is the first read. These will be back with appropriate punctuation.

Great. Thank you so much everybody. Really appreciate it.

Okay, moving on to item 12, unfinished business. Uh district reconfiguration.

Um we just wanted to put a a brief uh spot on the the agenda here. Um, obviously Superintendent Gray um touched on a variety of things in his um in his remarks for the superintendent's report.

We had over an hour of uh public comment. Um just wanted to provide some um a spot for for folks to ask some questions around process um information they would like. Um, we're going to talk a little bit more about the the facility study a little bit later on, but um, I just wanted to open this up, Chris.

Um, yeah, thank you for providing the time for that. Um, I really appreciate it. I do have kind of a list of questions that I wanted to just publicly ask. Um, understanding that those answers are not coming tonight to start with. Uh, but a lot of it is just about process. So, kind of outlining the process that we're we're using moving forward as well as and I know you talked about in your um in your report kind of having us reflect on the values that we would like to have in this and I would also like kind of understand what the one what the timeline is um that we're thinking of for this what the factors of that timeline include um because I think that's important. And I know the CDS transition is one of the factors that that's included in that, but that scenario 2 presented multiple different things that are honestly very different. Um like the middle school consolidation versus changing changing a PES. Um so I kind of want to get a sense of understanding the timeline for that. Um I'd like to understand how the community can have input on that. I I'm so happy that a lot of my neighbors, most of my neighbors probably showed up um and and I really appreciate the input that they've they've given us. But how do we have uh kind of a more formal way of of having the community participate um especially because we we presented three scenarios, but really those three scenarios are just a conglomeration of some ideas. Um, and so stepping back from those scenarios and and ignoring them for a second, kind of how do we get to the point where we go, what do we want our district to look like?

And now, how do we make that happen? And the scenarios are in the how do we make that happen part, but we haven't really figured out the what do we want our district to look like part. So like, do we want our middle school to be consolidated? Do we want it seventh? Do we want it sixth? like if we decide our our values in that then we can figure out how then we can use our district to change and um the facility study is a big part of that. So I would I'd love to have a facility study kind of push forward. I think that's great. Um that goes into kind of what other information we need. The facility study will help provide that. I think um but beyond the facility study is there any other information that we need um that we're kind of not thinking of? So putting some thought into that I think would be important. Um, and how can again we have these these three scenarios and and and I understand that but how do we present alternatives whereas they're not fully fleshed out but we have ideas that we like about certain things to then come together and collaborate into that. So, um, I wanted to kind of make sure that we we we thought about this in a way that is very kind of data oriented and the things we're thinking of are real and not perceptions because I know that there's a lot of perceptions between the three towns of of the different schools being in certain ways, but actually understanding the the real data on some of that, whether that's student numbers or costs or contributions from each town. Um, I think that'd be really important. So, Um those are not so much questions as statements I guess but uh I think timeline process moving forward how how that looks um what sort of community input we would have on that I think are the three big things on that. So thank you Chris. Those are all excellent. I I would think for me those are all things that I would want to know as well um before I could come to what I would feel is a even the beginning of an informed decision. Um I'm trying to think about ideas for um input from from the district. Um and I'm trying to recall in my brain what it was around but um we have had in the past um sort of like roundt like facilitated discussions where like anyone who's interested in coming comes and like tables are given a question and they come up they brains it's basically a lot of brainstorming opportunities that then get shared out and it just provides I mean uh you know several of our speakers said today like we have a lot of really bright minds in this district. Like, let's tap into them and and think of opportunities. And, you know, I mean, there's probably infinite opportunities, but there's probably, you know, a handful or a dozen that have real validity and possibility to move forward. Like, how do we collect them?

How do we distill them down? Um, and for me, that probably that I think can be happening. Um, and I don't know. I don't know what the right time, you know, pacing for these things is. I don't know if you need to have the facility study before you have that or if you do that while we're getting the facility study prepared or maybe there's two stages to this. Um, you know, I I would just like to see a way where we can try and tap into like all of these these ideas and these, you know, diverging um perspectives and um and and be able to in a um an open and transparent and safe place be able to say all the things, right? like why why this might be a good option for this group or that group or this this you know constituent or stakeholders or you know um sort of the the right versus right right like understanding what those all look like um because I think while you know we're not all going to love everything we hear I think that is the core of a of a open you know uh healthy discussion about something like this. Um so, you know, I think maybe we can brainstorm on how we brainstorm with our communities and provide opportunities for that. Um to start collecting those, you know, the feedback and and obviously we have board meetings and people are welcome at the beginning and end of every board meeting. We have the board email which um which folks are most folks are familiar with, but if you're watching and aren't, it's boardrs.org or and that goes to all of us um here on the board. Um so if I if I might Yeah.

So I want to just in response to where this is not a full answer, but this is sort of like my thoughts on how we should go forward from for right now. Um, as I said before, none of us here, none of us here and none of us here in the room has full information about what all of this entails. Um, we each have a perspective.

They're all valid, but we don't have full information yet. So, the process of getting the information we need is a pretty long and it process that takes an investment of time and money. And so I'm going to ask you in a little while to invest some money in a concrete step which is the facility study which will take some time to develop.

And the time at the moment is for everybody to be curious about what should inform this decision. I think what's happened at this point is that the issue has been laid open as necessary for discussion and the discussion and curiosity. So I I think now is the time to be curious and also to be empathetic. And I think it's a very good thing frankly that folks in Powell especially. We're hearing from folks in other communities too but we have a prepoundonderance of folks from Panel in the room are here to engage in this conversation.

Um so what we can do right now is be very deliberate about listening. I think board members can go back to your constituents and encourage them to come to board meetings, offer public comments, send emails, and watch the board meetings and become as informed and engaged as possible. I think it makes sense within the next few months for us to have open conversations about what we're thinking, what we're qu what we're curious about, and what our values are while we wait for the information we'll need because that that information is going to take time.

And part of what we'll come up with that is I have no doubt, you know, I presented three scenarios.

That's a starting place. There are going to be other ideas to consider. um those things may be in the well in the rearview mirror by the time we actually know fully what we're talking about. So I I just personally think the way forward is right now to listen and be curious, get the ball rolling on a facility study and invite people in.

Um yeah, I appreciate that. Um I hope that doesn't sound like nothing.

I it it's actually a lot, but it's it's these it's a little snowball that gets bigger over time, right? And and being being clear to to kind of us and some of the members of the public, we're not we're not talking about making a decision in weeks. We're talking about making a decision in this is at the double digits of months kind of things. Yeah.

At the earliest, it's a next year decision. Okay.

Um, and the other thing I'm thinking I one second, Colin, um, is, you know, um, tools we already kind of have at our disposal that feel like they might help inform this is like the strategic plan.

Like we have just gotten a lot of feedback from community members all through the district, right? Can we look at the feedback we got from that and you know kind of key into some of the the questions that Chris said like like what do we want the RSU5 to be like what comes out of that that helps inform the values that you said you know we need to weigh um you know I'm I'm trying trying to think of you know uh groups that are already you know involved and and doing some of this work that seems to me feels like it overlaps with that question. Um, so just a thought, Colin.

Yeah, I mean I was also just going to reference the strategic planning process which u if any of our guests are not currently involved in it, please get involved in that because that is our our uh our work as a district to try to articulate what it's exactly what you said. Um that is that is where we do that. Um and that we are doing that um and that is in process. uh we're working from the um the portrait of a graduate that um our uh high school student presented to us last week based on that work. So, um, so I just want to touch on that. And also, I think one thing that would be helpful, and I don't think this is a um a short-term thing, but it might be something to kind of either develop um uh kind of either out of the um facility study or kind of in tandem with it would be kind of an articulation um a sort of a public facing document of um sort of like drivers and dilemmas um and questions that we're trying to wrestle with um because I think that is uh the piece that that fundamentally um everything comes down to um is that we are we're responding to um a constellation of interacting um factors and um trying to navigate those. So I think that in terms of also like what Chris what you were saying in terms of like how also the community can have maybe kind of a clearer sense of sort of how to contribute um other ideas would be to would be in response to those response to those things um to say if we're if we're juggling like some of the things were already were already mentioned this evening and were discussed last week right sort of question of like um uh middle school or equity or transportation right? The sort of um and sort of aging infrastructure and all those things. So to sort of have that all kind of in one place um to get a little bit of a sense of sort of what are we like what are we really trying to juggle so that when folks are presenting ideas uh to us um it's with an understanding that it's that full constellation of things that we're trying to address. Um there's no it's not that like if somebody has an idea on like a very acute thing sure that's great but like uh very much the um the wicked problem we have right now is like how to address these interacting factors and so I think it'd be helpful to have some sort of public facing document that could uh articulate those.

I'm curious if you have a sense of how long a facility study would take because I think that would be helpful as we think about a timeline and and conversations. I can't give you a fully informed answer right now, but I can tell you it's going to take at least a couple of months to put it up to bid and then get in bids and then the facility study itself is going to take at least I this is a total ballpark at least three or four months.

So, we're we're definitely looking at this year um at the earliest I would say.

And in in the meantime, I hope it this is really for everybody who's in the room. I think what has forced why the timing for this conversation has happened is that we have a confluence of factors. We have this really difficult budget situation. And you know when I came here I realized I can't be the superintendent who just tries to pass on a 10 and a half% tax increase budget increase or on the other hand um radically slash the budget which would have a significant impact. So that's why I had to bring that to you all for guidance to find a target and having taken in mind what your target is and then having worked for hours with the team of people in the back of the room to figure out what's the least impactful way to get there. One of the hard truths of those conversations that shows up in the presentations I gave is that if we start at tier one and then go to tier two and then we go to tier three being the deepest level of cut that I didn't recommend, there aren't any cuts that are at aimed at panel until tier three. And the reason for that is because the structure of that building makes any cut the the impact of any cut there much more magnified. That's just the nature of the one classroom per grade level structure of that building. So when we're having conversations about combining classrooms at Mass Landing and Durham and Mor Street and we can't really make a change at Powell until we get to a non-recommended tier, it creates a dynamic when looked through the district-wide lens of we have to make that talkable.

And that that's what I need to ask folks here to understand is that through the district-wide lens, we have to at least talk about this. And the feelings that I'm hearing are I I would feel the same way. I would feel exactly the same way.

It has to be a two-way conversation about how do we balance those needs.

Sorry.

I also think we need to name some of the the feelings that we have that maybe aren't uh as happy as we would like them to be. Um someone earlier used the word jealousy which I found offensive. Um I want all of our children to have a great education. I celebrate it. Um I'm not jealous of penel.

My kids had great education at Mor Street and MLS. Um, I don't do this happily. I don't think any of us do.

Even considering it, I don't do it happily. Um, I really, that word struck me in a in a bad light. And I know that I know that panel folks are feeling that same ugliness and that they did their best to not use ugly words. And I appreciate that.

But also, um, I don't think there's a happy way to get to compromise. I think that's why compromise is what it is. Um, I I I'm not saying that I definitely believe that we should do option two. I'm not there yet. I don't think that.

Um, I just know that we have this constellation of needs, many of them legal requirements, and we have limited resources. We're making probably making cuts this year. Um, we have a set number of buildings, which is why we need this facility study. I It's an ugly thing. I It's unpleasant. I get it. I agree.

That's why we're all wrestling with it.

Um, and I appreciate the panel residents coming tonight. I really do. Um, all the ones that didn't and still emailed, I appreciate that, too. Last year I was over there doing exactly the same thing, speaking out about something that I didn't like. Um, and I understand your position. I understand the passion behind it. Um, we all love our kids. I get it. I mean, every single one of us has family in this district as well. That's why we're here. Um, we don't want to take anything away from you. We're in your community, too. It's a bigger community. I agree.

But we're also in your community. All of us. Even the Freeport people, even the Durham people. We don't want to exclude you. We want to include you. Um how that looks. I I don't want to do this.

I have seen some absolutely beautiful emails. Beautiful. The testimonies tonight, most of them very beautiful.

Um, I think we all feel the same way, but also we have a constellation of things that we have to address. And I'm not saying that this is definitely the answer. None of us want to do it, but we need an answer. And we're looking for partners.

We We have to educate our three-year-olds. We don't have a place to put them.

That's the long and the short of it. We also have this pain point of middle school that we addressed at length that some people touched upon but nobody really addressed where our Durham kids are on a totally different time frame because they're in a a school that is different than most middle school hours.

I there's more than one problem that we're trying to figure out and I it's a it's a hard thing and I understand it and I understand the feelings behind it and we want to be partners. We don't want this to be adversarial. We want to listen clearly.

Um our doors are always open. Our emails are always open. I read every single email I got, every single word. Um, I'm sure everybody else did, too. We're partners in this and we want we want to do what's best for all of our kids.

That's what we were elected to do, the kids first. We swore an oath to it. And so, I just wanted to level set to that.

We're we're considering the kids first and anything implied otherwise is kind of offensive to us.

So I think I mean I think everyone on this board is open to learning more, right? I mean I think that at the core of the vote that we took last time was we want to learn more about any scenario that could meet the needs, right? I don't I don't I I won't speak for everyone on this board, but I my sense is that no one is tied to any specific solution. I think we are very much in the curiosity, find out more information and if there is other solutions that still meet the needs of all the things we're trying to do in that in that constellation um then great. Um and that's what I would love for us to you know engage with with our communities to to tap into that. So um and I I think I I think I put that in every email to everyone who emailed the board. Um, I think I've emailed everybody back unless you emailed me this afternoon. I haven't we haven't gotten to those yet.

But, um, but please know that we do read them all. We do appreciate the feedback.

Um, we will find a way to to continue soliciting feedback, right? Like public comment is great um because you can get a lot of people through quick, but it's not a two-way conversation. Um, so I do think we need to have another there'll be another mechanism. there'll be another avenue um to continue that to continue that conversation. Um and you know and you know similar to similar to all the other things we just seem to be tagging into um Tom's uh uh superintendent reports. He gives us a budget update and a strategic planning update. Maybe this is a subtitle under the strategic planning update that we're constantly you know where are we at?

What's the next step? um how can we engage both as a board and as a community? So um so thank you for that.

Yeah. Okay.

I've been listening to what everyone has been saying and thank you for everyone showing up. It's it's a lot. Um I had a question about the strategic planning um portrait of a graduate. There were focus groups.

there were um surveys sent out to everybody and we could join or participate or not. And I'm wondering if there's we could do something like that with this because I do think that there's plenty of ideas out there. We are not the only minds. There's three communities that have great minds and I'm wondering if we could do something like that where there could be a two-way absolutely. Yeah. Okay.

Yeah. that I mean that's what I was very inarticulately saying trying to remember how we did what what we were doing it for before but it was it was you know it was basically a facilitated discussion that anyone who was interested and we had him in a couple different locations a couple different times to provide you know some prompts and and to just basically get to ideas and thoughts and feelings about things and um and brainstorm so somebody will remember what we were doing in particular or both.

Yeah. I mean, it could be either more personal, you know, face to face, but there could be an initial something that goes out to people via email that, you know, hey, if you have any ideas, write them down and send them in and then we gather all the information. I don't know how much additional work all of that would be, but I think this is such a large decision that it's I think it's kind of warranted to get some of that information. Yeah. Who's on our strategic communications committee?

Seems like a great idea for you guys, Steph.

So, if I could offer a thought about that, I think the answer is yes, um, more than once, but with being mindful of what kind of feedback is useful at what time.

For example, it would not be useful right now to send out a survey among us or the teachers or the administrators or the public to say, "What do you think we should do?" Because we don't know everything we need to know. But the kind of survey that would be useful is what do you value? What questions do you have? What are you concerned about? What problems do you see? That's useful information at this stage.

I I think it would be helpful to have what Colin was suggesting earlier document explaining the constellation of needs to go along with that so that they don't think this is just another strategic plan survey.

Um some of the questions I'm thinking about the strategic planning process and and I'm looking forward to looking back at the information we collected. I don't think there was anything related to space. You know, it was all like bigger picture. what do we hope our students will be learning and who are they developing to be as humans? How are they a part of the community?

Uh but I don't think there's anything that would really get to what we're talking about here. Um so I I look I think it would be great to do send another uh survey out but with the context of why we're asking.

Yeah. And just to follow up on that, I think it would be really helpful for us as a board if we could close that feedback loop really quickly and get that feedback from those surveys um just sort of periodically as we go through the process so we can sort of be thinking about that um as we move through and also if we get some really great ideas from those surveys to incorporate them into our feasibility study so that we're not just sort of railroaded down scenario two so to speak that we're really kind um making sure we take those into consideration when we do that process.

I think in term I'm sorry Steph, we've cut her off twice. Let her go. Let her go. I I I'm curious what you have to say, Tom. But um uh no, I just wanted to jump on the constellation document. Um that's something that I'm kind of holding I think in this process. Um, and just to sort of name where um, what might have felt like a quick jump on a scenario is that these are long meetings and we absorb a lot of different pieces of information at different times and you start to hold the different pieces sort of collectively in your mind. As a board member, I'm learning because I'm still very new. Um, and so I think it would be helpful for me as I consider something like this. And I also think like even if you're completely engaged in all of the meetings, it would be hard to hold all of those pieces unless you're here doing this work on a weekly bi-weekly basis.

Um, yeah, sometimes daily depending on uh hiring. But um yeah, so I just I just wanted to name that as like maybe both um a piece of information for why it felt harsh and abrupt um that so many of us were interested in exploring an option like this. Um and also that um yeah that like I think it would be helpful for all of us to have a collective understanding of all those competing priorities because they don't feel easily reconcilable. Um and um we've kind of we've named it, but I just want to reiterate that that um desire to pursue an option. I'm I want to hold all options on the table. I think we could we should consider all options and we shouldn't take any off of the table. I think that that's how we get to the best answer um for our students. um even the ones that feel impossible and super painful. Um I think that that's how we feel better about making a choice in the end is when we consider them all. Um and then the other I guess request that I have is the on like this constellation of problems document um the poet. Yeah, the poet. um is to also like maybe highlight the limited resources and how they interact. And I it's sort of like kind of the same thing, but I think it's also slightly different. Like when we're trying to solve this problem, what are the constraints that we're facing when we're trying to solve the problem? Um I think would be helpful. Thanks.

I was just trying to I I'm thinking about um when we can accomplish this work. So, I just want to make sure the kind of things we're talking about, I think they can happen in the next month or so or couple of months. They can't happen by the next board meeting.

Um, we're we just got a lot of plates in the air. So, I want to make sure our sense of what we can accomplish in the time we have is is realistic. Um, so I will be working on this and I will keep you I will invite your help with this um and try to develop a timeline that that works but it it can't be like next board meeting.

Um, two quick things. one is um I just uh to that point of all the things we have in the air um after we finish this particular conversation we are going to have a 120minute conversation uh about the budget only if you choose to No, we're going to use every damn minute. No, but I but like I bring that up also like to say that um to just emphasize we do have a number of uh balls in the air. Um but also that like we all we also are wrestling with some very like some very immediate um questions that I can't remember which meeting is it like two out from now that we are supposed to make a recom like basically approve um a budget that we're then going to take to each of the towns.

Um and uh and that that also as uh anyone who's been watching um is an incredibly uh difficult conversation where we're trying to figure out um how uh to uh cut $1.7 million um out of the budget that can only uh because it has been uh looked at very carefully um can only come from staffing. Um so also that again just to note that we are uh having that to clarify there is a lot there are a lot of non-staffing reductions.

No there there are but the lion share of them like we we know that that needs to come from there. Uh the other point just again um since we're being pedantic I may have also misheard Kelly but just to make uh sure I see a big difference between a feasibility study and a facility study. A feasibility study is when we know something uh that we want to do um and we present that plan and see whether we can do it. A facility study is saying what do we ha what do we have? Um and just to be clear that my understanding is we are not going into a facility study with any sort of with any agenda of like um we want to do this, can we do it? we're going into it with an understanding of what do we have um and then yes how do we then uh take that information and put it up against um for example the strategic plan um to try to understand that. So again I just want to that may be just my like um uh nomenclature kind of thing but I just wanted to make clear that that is a distinction at least in my mind.

Okay, you guys ready for 120 minutes of budget?

Let's do it. Okay. Um, so my understanding is we don't have um we don't have any updated um budget documents. Uh so there hasn't been any changes to the um the handbook and the budget um the many many page budget document that we got I think at the last meeting from Kelly. Um so we don't have any additional information um from what um from what we had last time other than the request for kind of that roll forward budget a couple years and what does that look like? So thank you. Thank you for that. Um, that was that was helpful to see what that looks like. Um, and to to Tom's point, um, it is 9:30.

It is been a, um, a long meeting, a a I I felt like a powerful meeting, you know, um, listening listening to to the community. Um, we certainly don't need to spend 120 minutes on this tonight. Um if if that is the will of the board, we have two more board meetings um to discuss the budget um before we vote to move one forward. Um but I do want to provide an opportunity if folks had specific comments or questions they wanted to talk about tonight. Um, I would I would suggest we don't really go into a huge 2-hour deep dive into the budget right now because I'm not sure how productive we would all be in that.

But Chris, um, yeah, I I agree with that. Um I did have a question on and we talked about this before but if you had thought about we had talked about how to an extent the you know six seven% is somewhat arbitrary and if you had a an idea of what you would prioritize if we gave you the sense of going between the um the seven and 8% um and I don't know if you you'd thought about that or if that's something you you had any kind of thoughts on. Well, I did think about that and I have to say I gave an answer at the last board meeting, but I really was over my skis in giving that answer because I had not talked about it with the team. So, I I'm going to be not over my skis right now and say we have talked about that scenario. We're not done talking about it. So, that that's the best answer I can give right now. Yeah, sounds great. Thanks.

I guess just on on that and I appreciate the clarification on that but to I mean to Chris's question I think the way I'm um currently sitting with that question is um is that I'm using the um the tears um as the way I'm I'm thinking about that. So for example, if uh the way my sort of understanding is that um if we were to say um we want to increase uh we want to give more leeway and say uh higher uh higher percentage tax increase um that then the things that uh are currently in tier two but not in tier one then tier one um but not in tier one. those would be the things to go. Um although I'm sorry, those would be the things that would be uh kept the opposite of go. Um again, that's not I'm not saying that's gospel. I'm just saying that's the way I'm holding it in my head. Um I think just to be very uh frank just to um I think for myself at this moment kind of keep uh keep clear what Tom has um reiterated a few times which is that those tiers were developed really carefully by the administrators um and it's their um it's their uh um recommendation. is their like best work um to uh solve a problem sort of to Valerie's point like to solve a problem we don't want to have um we don't want to have to cut the budget in that way but if we do to Tom's uh thing you you've reiterated a few times is that um the the least bad uh things that we can do um so again just to sort of name that that's kind of the way I'm kind of sitting with it but I I would be curious to know if there any uh updates uh next week I guess it would be um from uh from the administrators or from you Tom.

I think that's that's really helpful and I appreciate you're saying that and I'm I'm sure others in the room probably appreciate it too. Um, not that our thinking is perfect, but I what I can assure you is that tier one is the highest tier is what we considered to be after much discussion from many angles the least damaging to what we offer kids. And then tier two is next. It's a roadmap. Um, so to come somewhere in between tier one and tier two would be you'd get back some of what is in tier two, but you would if I well I didn't show you this. I guess I could should I put this up on the screen if you'd like.

So this is what I mentioned in my I will do. So this is what I mentioned in my um remarks. I'm just going to stay sitting here.

4162.

Can I say something real quick while you're pulling that up?

Yeah. So, I I totally understand what you're saying, Colin, and I appreciate that. I think what maybe a better way of trying to articulate what I'm I'm trying to get at is instead of forcing you to a 7%, if you stayed under 8%, what would you what would your budget look like then?

That's kind of I guess right because I understand the tiers are are that but the tears were somewhat I mean those were arbitrary numbers right so I'm also trying to kind of understand is like are we are we cutting out something that would be incredibly beneficial because we have to stay to that specific number or is there like almost like an under 8% priority if that makes sense. Well, really you're making a judgment about the tax increase you feel you can pass on the will pass and to use to use sorry I'm really bad with this to to use really rough numbers each percent I mean it you can see so what I'm showing you here is if you look at what Kelly did is she ran two scenarios At my request, the top scenario is if you make no reductions and continue to make no reductions, what our best guess is for the budget going forward. So, I sure can try. Let's see. Hold on.

Could you make the purple just a little more a little dark?

Oh my word. Okay. So that's that's as good as I can make it at the moment.

So the blue is this year, the purple is next year. Um next year without any reductions, the budget will be 49,000 49 million plus a little bit more. So that means that 10% of the budget is $491,000.

So 1% is roughly, you know, a quarter of that. So each teaching position is roughly 1% of the budget. That's roughly what it boils down to.

So if you carry forward this year's budget with no reductions, you're increasing the budget by 10.49%.

If you do that again the following year, it will increase by an additional 8.51%.

That's of course compounded as these things do. And the year after that would be 8.87%.

That does not include the town budgets.

It does not include the county budgets at the recommended level which is the quote unquote 7%.

You the 7% is actually 6.46% right now. If you take that forward a year out, it's 5.55 and another year out, it's 5.91.

So it it makes a big difference in the sustainability.

Maybe this is a question for Kelly. What was last year's? What did we end up with?

Last year's was about 6 point it was 6.5 plus change.

This is a question not related to this.

So, does anyone have questions about this before I launch?

So, basically, just to be clear, if we added even one teaching position back into this budget for this year, we would be talking about more like seven and a half%. Is that what I don't feel like I can say that but I feel that that effect would magnify going farther out and what it doesn't what this does not account for is that next year we are negotiating our largest contract which is the educator contract and all the other things that are happening in the economy that are affecting the expenses for all of our households and businesses etc.

I I think just the only other thing I would maybe add to Chris's question about the percentages is that is is that I think um and please jump in anyone else if they think I'm speaking nonsense. Um but those those percentages were based on um sort of two things. one sort of historical data um on not just what the increases have been but also um what the voters have told us um about those different um those different numbers sort of how uh um uh how much buyin from um the community as a whole and how much buyin from each of the individual uh voter the each of the individual towns voters um and so I think that the again that's the way I am thinking about those numbers is to sort of know that like seven is seven is higher than historically um uh has been something that the voters are excited about. I don't think you've gotten to seven actually.

But but I'm saying but I'm saying in terms of the but in terms of the like I think I think we may have if hold on.

What are we holding on? She's going to look up.

I think I think this is where I need Michelle Kelly. So like it's in the book. So, yeah, in in the in the budget handbook um that we didn't we we have a new one because there's no new information, but um again online as well under um the uh on a district website under the budget documents for 2627 um the 10-year adopted budget history.

So, FY26, the year we're in currently, it was a 6.83% year-over-year expenditures. In FY25, um it was a 6.48% 48% increase. FY24 was 4.99. FY23 was 4.22.

And then we have those lovely um years where we had a lot of additional COVID money. So we we all saw unrealistic budget increases um or or low increases.

F um FY22 was 2.09, FY21 2.32, FY20 was 3.43.

Um so you can see kind of like the trajectory that's happened as the all the additional influx of COVID money um left the district um but the needs of students did not decrease um they've only truly increased honestly um since the co years. So um that's where we were at last year was 6.83 just below the 7% threshold. And if you remember the budget vote was quite tight.

Um, and and I think maybe what I'm recollecting is I I what I didn't realize is our chart only goes back 10 years and my brain goes farther. Um, and I think if you went back to the beginning of the district, there is a period between 10 and 17, which is where we start here, where we were higher than that 7%. And in those early years of the district, um, the budget generally failed by a fair amount in both Panel and Durham and and passed it. I mean, we have never, knock on wood, failed the b the budget in total. Um, but it has it has varied based on a variety of things over the life of the district.

And I just want to remind folks that this 6.46% 46% year-over-year increase actually amounts to um a lot larger year-over-year tax impact in Durham and Poundal um estimated at 8.83 in Durham, 7.87 in Pound. So that's that's going to be really hard for some people to um stomach if we go even higher than that.

So I think we really need to be mindful not only of this number up here, but the actual town by town um taxation impact, which was the point I was stumbling to try to make. So, thank you everyone else for making it more uh beautiful.

This um spreadsheet that you see up there, we just finished developing this this morning, which is why it's not in your packets, but I'll make sure you get it.

I I'll just say, Kelly, thank you so much for putting this together. I know that again it's not it's not gospel but it's so it's so incredibly helpful to have that as a point of reference um because I think that like know again not knowing but having um a professional uh a numbers professional uh say that um that this puts us on a track um that is has a higher likelihood um of being more sustainable than the status quo. It's just it's just it's just really helpful and it and it and it eases my it doesn't ease all of my my concerns um globally, but it just it it it's really helpful.

So, just thank you so much, Kelly, for that.

Sorry, we were just figuring out some math because we had different papers.

Um, Kelly, the numbers Kelly was referencing of the 8% 8, five, and seven for Durham, Freeport, and Powell tax impact um was actually last year's 6 and a half% budget and the tax impact for the towns of that this so in our current budget year, that was the tax impact that that six and a half um this year's based on the budget um brochure, um it's in the it's five, three and a half and five, five and a quarter for the 310. So, just wanted to clarify that and that's mostly driven by um uh an increase in the subsidy. The subsidy went up um because the required mill from the state went down. So how much we were required to raise even though um valuations went up in all three towns the amount we were required to raise did not okay so yeah Anna one thing that I think maybe Chris had asked about in a previous meeting that I don't think we've gotten and would be helpful I think is um looking at edtech positions and what we currently have in the different ed techs. Um, and then alongside just like the proposal of the different edte that we're proposing to cut cuz that's for me I really want to try to follow what you all the you know the building administration administrators and Tom you've laid out um sticking to as close to tier 2 as we can you know just like Kelly's point. Um, but I think the edteex is where I'm having the hardest juicy for me when we're thinking about larger class sizes, especially just from memory. Like Freeport Middle School, we're talking about like 23 kids per class in one of the grades. I can't remember which one. Um, so it just seems like a really strong support staff that then we're cutting with larger class sizes and they tend to have less of a budget impact than teachers. So I would like a closer look on that. Um, and then also it would be helpful with that edtech data to have to look at how many special ed positions we have open. Um, five five and a half right now. District total. Yep. Okay.

Five and a half edte special ed edte are open right now.

Got it. and like how maybe we've been told this information about how long they've been open for and you know um Kelly was mentioning we're going to be using some of the funding because they weren't and I think actually you Michelle in the last meeting had mentioned well could we just since we can't hire them anyways which I don't want to go there but it does merit some conversation of like well do we just hope that we're going to get five I mean at this point it seems maybe a little unrealistic that we would get all five So that's a little bit the only thing for me that I feel like I really need more data on.

I feel I can speak to some of that now.

So we did discuss as part of our deliberations whether we should just not include those positions and and gain a savings that way.

We really feel we need to keep trying to fill those positions because many of them are IEP related and they're for the most needy kids. And so in in good conscious conscience we have to try to fill those positions and you know as I look ahead to next year we h are have some ideas that we can't put in place right this moment but that over time we could put in place to try to attract people to those positions. Um, in the meantime, the No, I don't want to get ahead of the agenda too far, but we hopefully we're coming up on the end of the agenda.

Hopefully, we have budgeted for those positions. We're now more than halfway through the year. So, we have five and a head at five and a half edtech wages budgeted for that. even if we hired individuals into those positions right now, we're only going to spend what's left in the school year. So, we have some money there that we can dedicate to bringing on an early childhood director as early as possible because we need that person's help to get that program off the ground. Um, I hope that helps at least in part and you can perhaps for the next meeting give us sort of a layout of what ed techs look like today and what they would look like under the tiers.

Sure. Sure. Yeah. Okay. Thank you.

Yeah, I think I understand um what the the cuts that are proposed right now with edex, but what I don't understand is how many are left.

How many are Yes. and in the behavioral versus the academic etc.

Okay.

So, um are we feeling like we're ready to move on from budget for now? And obviously we'll have more. Yep. Steph, I just have a a question of like what we should intend the next couple of budget meetings to be for us as a board. Um, so typically, um, I don't have the schedule in front of me, but it might be also in here. Is it in here, too?

Okay, great.

Yeah. And like more I guess a more specific question is like what are what do we need to do as a board at those meetings?

That's why I'm checking to see what we've got left. Um, so we adopt on the 25th. So, um, in a perfect world, and I love perfect worlds, um, in the next two meetings, uh, we would essentially by the end of the 18th have come to a consensus on what we want that budget to be and then we would vote on it on the 25th because that that uh uh streamlines a lot of the signing and paperwork and things like that as opposed to if we can still be triggering things on the on the 25th if we need to be and the 25th would be like we're it's an agenda item on our agenda that we vote on.

Yes. We adopt the budget on the 25th.

We are going into that believing that we we know that we have consensus. That's the perfect world.

Yeah. Ideally, we we have on the 18th agreed to what the budget should be for the following year and we would adopt it on the 25th. Then we have the three meetings in each town to talk about the budget and then we would have the annual budget meeting on May 13th. Um Cara has a um can I see that it says public input on budget on the 18th and 25th? Yes.

Can you say more about that? I Yes. So um we wanted to uh highlight the opportunity for so um the where we go to the three towns that's sort of after we've adopted the budget. to help answer questions, inform folks. Um, but the we wanted to provide public input on the budget on the 18th and 25th where folks um well, there'll be a specific point on the agenda where people can either ask questions. They can come and ask a question, clarifying question, they can give us their thoughts on the budget before we adopt it. Um, because you know, some feedback we've heard in the past is like, well, great. I thanks for coming and te telling us, but you've already adopted it. there's really not much we can do other than either vote it down in June or or try to change it at the annual budget meeting. So, that was two um public input opportunities for folks that wanted to share their thoughts or suggestions or questions in advance of us adopting.

Yeah, make sense. Okay, thank you. All right. So, new business.

Moving on. Um, I will get the motion on the floor and then Tom will fill us in on the details. Do I have a motion for consideration and approval to create the position of early childhood special education ECSE assistant director Malik. Thank you, Cara.

Okay. So, as I mentioned, we would like to get hit the ground running as soon as possible to hire this person to spearhead our adoption of early childhood and fulfillment of our responsibilities under the statute. Um, as I mentioned in a previous meeting, we have found a way to offset the cost of hiring that person through the money that's coming from the early childhood fund from the state so that it is a minimal impact to our district budget.

We're framing the position as an assistant special education director so that they can be useful in facilitating all of the IEPs and meeting the needs of the kids in early childhood who for whom we're required to provide those services. Um and we can bring that person on board early in this year before the state's allocation kicks in for next year because we have money available for that we have not spent for special ed ad ed techs.

So this vote here is to simply create the position and by creating the position it allows them to post for the position because most administrative or or uh hiring for next year people are starting to do those postings now. So we want to maximize our opportunity to uh get a great candidate. So this isn't to hire the person. This is essentially just to create the position and then they would post it. Uh, and then depending on what that process looks like, it's probably several months before someone um would come before the board for hiring and and you know, if we could get them to start before July 1, great. Um, but the timing of that will depend on the candidate and the process.

But this just gets the um gets it moving. Questions?

Lois, I need to have a clearer rationale for why we need this position. I'm not I I don't have a background on this position. So, I guess I need to have an explanation of why a full-time assistant special ed director is necessary.

So, we're going to be taking on responsibility for FAPE for three and four year olds, which we currently don't have. And in addition to that, we have uh in this district, we have a special education director. That's not the actual title of the position. It's director of instructional services. And we don't for a district of 1900 kids, we don't have an assistant special education director. We have coordinators in each district. Um but quite frankly that is very lightly staffed in special ed and the needs are absolutely exploding in that area. Not only in the number of kids we are required to serve but in the needs of the kids especially since the pandemic. Um so we need an additional person. We just need an additional person particularly with early childhood which is a very big we need somebody with knowledge of early childhood special education as well.

And I and I kind of asked that question too, Lois, when it was proposed. Um, and the way it was explained to me that made a fair amount of sense um was this person would also be responsible for sort of kicking off this process, right? Um, for the three and the four-year-olds. Um, I mean, we have four-year-olds now that we provide services for, but we are not required to do any of the we don't do the IEPs for those kids. We don't we are not responsible for any of that right now.

That's still CDS. We are basically just the service provider. Um, and so the the ability to to launch that early childhood um uh CDS transition to the district, um, this person would be obviously highly involved uh in that.

And then once that was sort of up and running um their support as a special ed um uh assistant director could help our existing director with the IEPs around the district. Right. So um and a a chunk of that position is funded through the additional funding for the um early childhood education. So, we're able to bring on a person that arguably we need already to help support this new program and get funding through the new um early childhood bucket, I guess, if that makes sense.

So, and we don't have a number yet for three year olds.

We do have a rough estimate. It's hard to predict, but I can tell you I forget what the number is off the top of my head, but what I can tell you absolutely certainly is that other districts who have are ahead of us in adopting this model are finding once you build it, they crawl out of the woodwork. And so that I shouldn't put it that way. The way I should put it is that families whose kids are not getting served right now find that the service is much more accessible when the school district takes it on. and they come forward to get services that are beneficial for their kids. So, we if if this district if it pans out in this district the way it has in every other one, there will be more than we know of right now.

I agree with that. I obviously I mean that's an that's an obvious. So, can you estimate what the average full-time assistant special ed director salary is?

I can tell you that we have budgeted this yes at the rate of an assistant principal because we don't currently have an assistant special ed director here. So we don't have a you know we don't have that already a model for that within the district. We've developed this model based on the rate of pay of an assistant principal and the way that um well if you've been on you unfortunately the timing of it was a couple of meetings ago I think it was like actually the meeting just before you arrived we went through the finances of it all but the way it boils down with the state's allocation versus local money is that for the cost of about $17,000 we can gain a assistant special ed director, which is just a bargain because of the additional funding that we get. Um, that shifts from CDS providing the services to us providing the services along with the responsibility that they were previously doing the work of partially CDS.

Partially doing I do have the numbers. Thank Thank you.

Go ahead. So currently, so that's and we don't have future because next year's three-year-olds are currently two, right?

So um that's how math works in time. Um currently three-year-olds, two have been identified through CDS and are receiving services through CDS and five have been identified but are not currently being served. So there's seven in district that are three that we would be required to figure out some sort of plan for if we were live with three-year-olds today.

And those are the ones that we know about.

Correct. Those I mean and then we're not testing them.

People find that all of a sudden people start going through child find more and the numbers increase.

So, this person would be responsible for child find for three and four year olds, doing all of the written notices, coordinating all of those IEPs, coordinating the transportation that would likely come from some of them. It It's substantial.

I should actually add another component of it is that to meet this need for special education services for three and four year olds, we also have to provide access to regular education for least restrictive environment. So there is some oversight responsibility of the general education that we haven't yet developed. We have it for four year olds, but some of the things we may need to add to do that better for four-y olds is full day programming. And we haven't even begun to figure out how we will meet the need for the three-year-olds when we take those on year after next.

But they'll have to have some access to not only the special education services, but a general education environment. And this person would be responsible for coordinating that.

I was just going to follow up with the four-year-old numbers since I also have those in front of me. Um, four-year-old numbers are 12 that are currently being served by RSC 5, 14 that are currently being served by CDS and then two that have been identified or not currently being served.

And I think I think I recall them saying that this is a lower than average number for the year.

It it is.

So if I can just express my concern about taking people who have direct contact with students and cutting their positions while layering on another administrative position. That's my concern.

Understood. Yeah.

Just on that, I think again, I really appreciate you articulating that, Lois.

I think that um again, my understanding is it just goes to what uh Tom said about the um it's $17,000 is what we are is what we are committing. Um and then we are getting um the the more than the lion share of that covered from money from the state.

So I guess just uh for whatever it's worth in my mind it's not um the we're not making a choice between an administrator and a teacher. Um we're making a choice of whether or not we get an administrator and spend $17,000 or don't get an administrator and don't spend $17,000. that that's the that's the choice. Um, which again, $70,000 is $70,000, but that's that's the way I've kind of wrapped my head around it.

Car.

Yeah. And can you say more about what that alternative of not hiring this position, not creating this? We can't do this without this position.

We must have this position, right? because I mean if if I'm doing the math right, we're we're talking about 40 IEPs that we currently don't do that we would be responsible for doing um in a district that does not have a very we don't have great depth in terms of the people we have at at the admin level for special ed now plus taking on that screening that is currently done by CDS.

Right. Yeah. Chris and if we if we told the state that hey we don't need this position we don't want to create it we don't we don't save any money we just don't get that money from the state that's right it it's a reimbursement model right like they they don't they wouldn't just and that's year after year after year going forward that's not just like once that's that's continuous for correct I mean we know at this point right as far as we know right now it might be helpful to also that the 17,000 is because we've bundled this position in with other direct service positions.

Some of those we're already paying for in our budget and we're transferring them to the state's allocation. But we're also going to be getting under the heading of that $17,000 an additional special education teacher to edex a speech language pathologist. Am I missing anything about transportation?

So, but this we're basically adding an entirely new grade span to our district and this is the person who will set that up for us.

Okay, any other questions on this one? We have a motion and we have a second.

I'm getting thumbs up from Erica. See, this is why I try to do at the beginning because then I forget. Um, all right. All those in favor?

Any opposed?

Okay. Thank you. Okay. So, now we have to put a new motion on the agenda because we are past 10 o'clock, friends, which means we have a policy that says if we're going to go past 10 o'clock, we need to vote to continue. Uh, so um I guess do we have a motion to uh so maybe I'll tell you what's left on the agenda. We have two more things on the agenda.

Uh, and I would say we want to get through both of them. My suggestion would be do them both. We have three.

Oh, we have the addition of the calendar. That's right. I forgot about that one. Uh, so we have three, but uh they they should be relatively speedy, I would imagine. Um, do I have a motion to continue beyond 10 o'clock? Kelly and Cara. Thank you. All those in favor? Anyone opposed? No.

Usually people always vote against that one. Um, or at least somebody. All right. So, so we will So, that was 131.

So, 132. Do I have a motion for consideration and approval to expend up to the motion on the agenda says 75,000 in our uh our finance committee meeting today. Uh we felt it might be prudent.

This is an up to number. We will only spend what the uh the bid comes back at for the pol uh for the um capital the facility studies.

Thank you. the facility study. Um, but we didn't want to run into a point where we couldn't engage if it ended up being $76,000 and we'd have to wait for another board meeting to do that. So, um, while it says 75 in the agenda, I'm going to ask for a consideration and approval to expend up to $100,000 from capital reserves for a facilities study.

Chris and Colin, thank you. Um, I think we've talked about this a fair amount.

This would essentially allow us to put it out to RFQ um which we would receive back. Hopefully uh we would get some some good um options out of that. Um and then we could engage the work of the facility study.

Do folks have additional questions on that piece? I know we've talked about a few times throughout the night.

Great. So we have a motion. We have a second uh for 100,000 from capital reserves. Um, all those in favor?

Great. None opposed. So, we will move on to the adjustment to the agenda, which I did not lose in all that time. Aren't you proud of me? All right. So, do I have a motion for consideration and approval to change the March 13, 2026.5 professional learning day to a 0.5 student day morning and a 0.5 professional learning day afternoon on the 2025 2026 calendar. Kelly and Steph, thank you.

Do you have anything additional to add on that from what you told us at the beginning? Nope.

I have a question. I feel like it would be prudent for us to come up with a plan for if we have three more snow days. I know you said that we aren't deciding on anything more than so ne at the next board meeting. I need to we need to flesh out our plan for remote days, but that's our next backup because before the next board meeting, we could have three more snow days.

I I feel nervous about waiting until the next board meeting. Well, this week at one point it was like well Monday and maybe Wednesday and maybe Friday and it didn't turn out that way, but I mean we we are in a still halfway through winter like just with full disclosure that we don't have that plan fully fleshed out yet, but we're we're basically reviving and rejuvenating the plan that existed before during COVID. We just haven't had a chance to to fully flesh out the details of that. if you wanted to authorize us to use remote school days now um we could continue that plan and send it to the commissioner um and we would be equipped to do that.

None of these are are really ready to go until the commissioner approves them.

So my understanding of the remote days was you have to have a certain number of kids participate. We did it during COVID because we had onetoone access for every child regardless of age. So the younger ones had iPads to access. I I guess I'm if if we say yes to this and there's a snow day tomorrow, like there's no way it's a remote day, right? Like because don't we have to provide food? I mean, there's a lot of pieces that go into for it to for it to count for it to count, right? We have to send a meal home. And so, we either need to call it the day ahead um and have school nutrition prepare like lunch bags ahead of time or we would have to send out our drivers in the middle of the day to deliver it doortodoor, which is fraught dur because it would be bad weather clearly in a snowstorm. So, that's not really a good option. Um, so it it will take some lead time for us to develop that.

Yeah. I'm just so confused on how some schools do remote days all the time. Um, like how are they how are they meeting those needs?

I also am wondering about so what how many kids need to come to school for it to count? Oh gosh. Is there a percentage top of my head?

Two.

Two. Right. So if you said both your kids I think I'm concerned about let's say there's school on June 24th and June 25th it doesn't matter if they show up that day because it's does it not that's a no what I mean is is like I think we should wait on this conversation. I think it's late and I think we're getting more into like what if this happens. I think we should go stick with Tom's plan of voting for the March day and then three snow days. It's unlikely that that will happen. It would only have to be two, right?

Because the plan was we would only go to remote after two more, right? So, we're at three, four, five. If we do this, we're at three.

Yes. Yes. If we do this, we're at three and then four, five, day six is would be the recommendation to go remote. So, we would I mean I guess we could get three days between now and the next board meeting, but um we could also call an emergency board meeting if we had to.

Yeah. Well, I think that is what we would do. I mean, if it's if like Right. I mean, if we if we call two snow days before the next before the next board meeting, I think um you all need to have a plan in pocket and we need to have an hour free to talk about that. Yeah.

Is that is your hand up or you just like Okay, you're losing things. Oh, yeah. I see it.

Thank you. Um, could you just tell me please if there's any impact on the collective bargaining agreement between either ESP or the teachers by changing the date in the calendar at this late date?

Do you mean for the the um for changing the work day to day to a to a school day, half day, student day, and then I'm assuming moving the work day, I think you said this to the end of the year. Can you tell me if there's a collective bargaining issue?

So, we what we had originally planned for was a half teacher uh PLLD day on that day. This would be turning it into a full teacher day. And part of what we would need to do is have the teachers do plans for remote days.

But I don't think you would change their number of hours.

It wouldn't change number of hours. It would it would go from half a day now um and presumably an extra day in June because if we don't do this, we have to make up the day in June. Correct, right? So we would do a full day now and they'd get the time then.

Yeah. Got it. And it's basically the same with the edteex. Valerie, I have a question about the 13th. I think I remember that that's district three for band and chorus.

It is. Yeah. And I I regret that Sean has left because I know that on Monday he stated that it was a weird thing if we do this.

It is a forg wrinkle. They already have a plan and they can't change it for that day. So, we're not going to be able to send the kids to region 10 that day. Um, so it's a half day with no region 10.

Um, and there is the District Three Festival at the high school that morning. We can work around it, can't we, Jen?

Jen was looking right.

There's gonna be so much music going on in the school that day. It's going to be great.

Yes, we can. But I also wanted to note that for region 10, that is an event called um, Skills USA. So, a ton of our region 10 students will be on that trip no matter what, whether there's um a student day or not um for the music festival. Yeah, we'll have to make some arrangements, but um we definitely can do that. Arrangements. I see what you did there, J.

Yeah, I know. That was that was a late night pun. Love that. Thank you. Will's impressed.

All right. Any other questions on that?

So, what I'm hearing is is we're going to vote on this. We're going to leave the remote days to a future date.

Hopefully, not before our next board meeting.

Great. Um, did I get a motion for that one, Erica? I did. Great. Kelly and staff.

All those in favor? None opposed. Great.

All right. So, now are we on to the last item?

We are on to the last item. Oh, this is my favorite one on the agenda. This is a good one.

So, do I have a motion for consideration and approval to hire a principal at the Durham Community School for the 2026 2027 school year effective July 1, 2026.

Colin Anna, thank you.

I am very pleased to present to you Kate Hillman Harrison. Um, who is currently the assistant principal at Durham Community School who absolutely has impressed everyone in that school with her abilities and her dedication and her caring. Um, as you can see from the materials in front of you, Kate has a bachelor's degree from the University of Maine and a master's degree in curriculum and instruction from the University of Hawaii, which I'm really jealous of.

Came back. And Kate is I I can't overstate how deeply appreciated and respected Kate is here. So, Kate, are you in the room?

Come on down, Kate.

Can we vote first? I don't want to make her come up in case, you know, it's like when people like ask propose to someone on live TV and you're like, "Oh, no." True.

You don't have to say anything yet. So, we have a motion. We have a second.

Are there any questions? Just for for purposes of of folks watching or the folks that hung in there with us. Um we had a full uh hiring committee as we do for any principal position which included community members, board members, staff, administrators from across the district. Um we um had a open process for collection. We uh interviewed um the group met, developed questions, screened all of the applications, had first interviews, second interviews, um uh reference checks. So, it was a full comprehensive uh full comprehensive process um which landed us here with Kate this evening. So, all those in favor, none opposed. Congratulations, Kate. Yay.

Do you want to say anything? Something now if you want.

Um, I'll just say thank you very much for this opportunity. I'm really excited to step into the role of principal at Durham Community School. It's a place that I've grown quickly to love and um just really looking forward to taking on this new role and um I've had a excellent mentor. I've learned a lot um and I'm excited to keep growing with the school. So, thank you. Thank you, Kate.

So, my question is is do you kick Will out of his office now? Do you start redecorating?

All right. Uh, so we are back to public comment. If we have anyone who would like to speak, you are welcome to. Same rules apply. Name, town.

Three minutes.

Thanks for giving Oh, I should announce myself again. Uh, Brandon Perry panel.

Uh, thanks for giving a few minutes. I just wanted to comment back after, you know, I'm sure there's a lot of feedback for you guys and I really appreciate all of the commentary that followed and my apologies especially on the tone of some of those comments. Um, and I know I just wanted to put a cautionary word in about having moved forward with the facilities uh exploration. I've been party to enough committees of the sort before that I know that once that ball gets rolling and particularly if there's only one option that's been explored that tends to just become the option and so we definitely want to stay involved and make sure that that doesn't happen to be the case here where we have a deep appreciation for your work and everything that's offered up. Um, and I I I think just, you know, putting that out there, I've seen it happen plenty of times where all of a sudden the clock just runs out and you have one option that's actually far enough to materialize. Uh, and I'd hate to see that here. So, otherwise, thank you guys.

Thank you. All right. Oh, sorry.

Um, yeah, Mark Douly from 196 Merrell Road. Um, I just wanted to follow up on something I think that uh Chris was trying to to get at. Um, going going through the um I was trying to figure out what the disparity is in costs for panel and it was really hard to find that information um publicly. Um, I'm pretty good at doing the calculations. I could calculate cost per pupil. I could see the uh square footage that each student takes in each building. Like I can find that information, but the cost disparity, I wasn't really able to tease that out. And I think like for me, that's what makes me feel bad. Like I don't want to have to be getting more than I pay for. And I don't think anybody here wants that. And so if we could figure out exactly what is meant by that, I think it would it would definitely help the conversation. Um, and some of the items would be um like a cost per pupil. I thought that was really relevant what the what the other gentleman said to compare yourself to last year. I think that's much more effective than comparing yourself to the other schools.

Um if if we're seeing rises in cost per pupil, maybe we should be um also showing side by side with that. We want to see the courses and the number of teachers teaching those courses. How's the programming changing over time because maybe we're heading in a the wrong direction in that regards. So um that would help because it's not just inflation, there's something else going on. So thank you. Thank you.

All right, we started and we ended with Mark.

Yeah. Uh, so I would take a motion to adjurnn.

Kelly and Cara, thank you. All those in favor? No one votes no to that. Thank you. Thank you very much for not only coming and speaking, but also hanging in there with us for many hours. So,

============================================================

RSU5 BOARD OF DIRECTORS MEETING TRANSCRIPT
Meeting Date: March 11, 2026
Source File: transcript_2026-03-11_4IipgPJRPYg.txt
District: Regional School Unit 5 (Freeport, Durham, Pownal, Maine)
============================================================

That's what everybody wants me to be. Right in the front.

as far as Okay. So, we're going to get started.

Um, I just want to um let folks know if they have the desire to speak at public comment, we ask that you sign in.

I don't know where Erica Oh, there Erica. Uh there's a blue sheet over there. Um and it it'll help us go through the list hopefully a little in an expeditious way. Um okay, we'll get started. So, good evening. Welcome to the RSU5 board of directors. It is Wednesday, March 11th, 2026, and we are here at the Freeport High School Library. Anna and Kelly are uh not going to be with us tonight, so this is this is the full crowd, and we will get started with the pledge of allegiance.

stand indivisible and justice for all.

Okay. So, do I have a motion for consideration and approval of the minutes from the February 25th, 2026 meeting as presented, barring any errors or omissions?

Karen and Lois. Thank you. All those in favor? None oppose. Great.

All right. Um, we're not adding any items, right?

I do have an additional additional resation tonight. Oh, under eight, though. Okay. So, that's already in there. Um, okay. Uh, so we will get started with good news and recognition. Maria, so March is National Youth Art Art Month and this is the annual observance each March to emphasize the value of art and education for all children and to encourage support for quality school art programs. And so March 14th is the Scholastic Awards Ceremony. Um, this ceremony will be held in Portland High School.

There's the address, but yeah, Portland High School. And this is just to honor people that are in high school and that love art and that are very good at it.

And the Congressional Art Awards is five of the eight works selected from Maine's two representatives to Congress are from Freeport High School. We have Laya Abbott, uh, Nina He, Jaden Schultz, Alli McGee, and Lana Senna.

and the Portland Museum of Art Youth Art Month exhibit exhibition. Each year, main art education association. Um, member teachers select one piece of great artwork from their classmates to represent the creative efforts of their students. And this year, my good friend Alli McGee was selected and she is representing Freeport High School. Her art is in the Portland Museum of Art.

It's really beautiful. You should go check it out. Um, and just congratulations to all of the students who have worked really hard and have beautiful artwork in the hallways. So, yeah, that's all.

Thank you. So, five out of the eight for the state are from Freeport. That's incredible. Congratulations.

Okay. Well, thank you for that. Okay. So, we will move on to public comment.

Um, I uh I didn't do this last time and I apologize. Usually when we have a large group for public comment, I try to read our just some remarks and some ground rules before we get started. I know a lot of folks here have have joined us at before, but just just to be um thank you just to be complete. Um so in order for us to hear uh from the largest number of different voices, each speaker uh will be limited to three minutes. Malik will have a timer going.

Um, so when when you hear the I don't know which one she picked, the ring she picked uh go off. I just ask that you try to uh wrap up your comments or wrap up your thought uh so we can hear hear from from the most folks. Uh for those who have not participated at our meetings before, just a few ground rules ahead of time. At the outset, we ask each speaker to identify themselves with their name and their town of residents.

We ask you to try and be brief and not repeat yourself. We know discuss discussions of school related issues can be emotional, but please remember that our children are watching. We are neighbors, so we try to always be civil uh and kind. Uh we don't per permit profanity or shouting, but I don't think that's going to be a problem this evening. Um and certainly no comments that disparage or attack individuals or groups of individuals. Uh speakers should direct all of their comments to the board. This is the opportunity for the board to listen to the opinions of the public that relate to the school and the educational matters. It is not a public debate nor a conversation. So, no questions should be directed to the board, but the board um as the board will not be responding, but we're here to listen. Um we are not a we do not permit uh complaints, allegations, or specific um comments about specific staff members. These are personnel issues which the board is not permitted to hear in public. Um, we do have a policy around that. So, if folks wanted to share anything, they could go through that policy. Um, yeah. So, that Thank you. I appreciate everyone's patience as I go through those uh those ground rules this evening. Um, and we will get started with Marcia Wood. So, um, what I'll do is I'll I'll put the I'll mention the next person up so that you can kind of queue up behind. So, Marcia will be first and then Aaron Abbott would be next.

Hello. Good evening, board members. Um, again, my name is Marcia Wood. Um, I'm currently a high school teacher here, a math teacher. Um, however, I reside in Raymond. Just moved there. Um, but I've been a high school math teacher here for 13 years, one of the longest math teachers here, um, in the high school. I also coach field hockey and lacrosse.

Um, and I'm here to express my concern regarding the potential um, reduction of a math position here at the high school.

So recently the math department was told that our um by our administration that our PSAT scores and our SAT scores were a little low and moving forward they're going to be an area of concern. So given this goal, I kind of struggle to understand how reducing the number of quality math teachers would support improving these outcomes. So a recent study from the learning policy institute states that through interpersonal relationships teachers can attend to the social and emotional development needs of the students and when this happens the students are better positioned to engage in math and their learning making them more successful. So one of the reasons that um our math scores may be low um is that not all students enjoy math. Shocking I know. I know. and many of them lack their confidence in their skills and their abilities. But building strong connections with students can help them feel more confident and more comfortable in the classroom which in turn can improve their confidence. So as these students have a more positive mindset when they sit down to take those PSATs and those SATs, they're instead of giving up on those harder problems, they now have the more confidence in their abilities. So they're going to try the harder problems. They're going to try to persevere through that. they're feeling better about their math skills. They may not love math, you know. I'm not here to make them love it. I make we're here to make them tolerate it sometimes. So hopefully this would improve our math scores.

In the 13 years here, it's very rare that we have found such a quality teacher that is so involved in this school and all the different aspects of it in such a short time here. This person in this position goes above and beyond her duties as a math teacher by being our department and chair in just her third year here, math team coach, working summer school, homework center, mentor coordinator, math curriculum on the math curriculum committee, JV softball coach, and starting a crochet club as a volunteer.

But what is most important is the fact that she can relate and teach kids and get them excited or like I said at least tolerate math. Part of our strategic plan is about making connections. And I really would think that someone that can connect and educate all levels of students from the honors and the AP kiddos to the students receiving special education plans would want to be retained.

It's rare that we can find such a quality teacher that fits all of the realms of what it means to be a highly effective teacher.

With this potential cut, we would lose one of the best things that have ever happened in our math department. And while I would really hate to see that happen, it would be such a loss for our department, but even more so to our FHS students. Thank you for your consideration.

Thank you, Marca.

Aaron, and then after Aaron, uh, Haley could speak. Okay.

All right. Good evening, schoolboard members. My name is Erin Abbott. I currently live in Yarmouth. Um, I have been a math teacher for 20 years, eight of those at Freeport High School. I am here to express my deep concern regarding the proposed elimination of a math teaching position at the high school and the immediate and long-term impact this decision would have on our students. Our department was recently informed that our standardized test scores in math have fallen below the state average for Maine. If our district is committed to improving student achievement in mathematics, eliminating a math position moves us in the opposite direction. Reducing staff will will inevitably increase class sizes, limit individualized support, and make it more difficult to address the very concerns we are being asked to improve. The position currently under consideration is held by a young enthusiastic teacher with an exceptional mathematical mind and a remarkable ability to connect with all students. She has been highly successful in building strong relationships with students across the spectrum from AP courses to to intervention classes.

She collaborates seamlessly with our ELELLL and special education departments to ensure every students has the tools and support needed to succeed. Perhaps most importantly, she has sparked genuine excitement about math and computer programming, subjects that do not typically genuate genu generate sorry enthusiasm.

It has been incredible to see our students happy to attend math class.

Beyond academic growth, their confidence in their mathematical abilities has increased, their overall mental health has improved, and many have developed a new interest in pursuing math related careers in fields of study after graduation.

At a time when we are striving to raise achievement and support students in well-being, removing a dedicated and highly effective math educator would be a significant setback in both now and in the future.

I strongly urge the board to reconsider this proposal and to prioritize investments that directly support student learning and success for all of RSC5. Thank you for your time and your consideration.

Thank you, Aaron. So, after Haley, I have uh Lisa Ber.

Hello, I'm Haley Goodspeed. I am a Freeport resident. Um, I'm here to urge you to reconsider the redu the proposed reduction of a math teaching position here at the high school. While I understand the complexity of budget decisions, this this particular cut conflicts directly with the values outlined in our district strategic plan, the emerging strategic plan. Uh, though still in draw form, the plan was shared uh shaped by extensive community input, students, families, educators, and community members. It reflects who we are and what we value. belonging, opportunity, strong relationships, relevant learning, and equitable access.

I speak not only as a teacher uh but as a member of the strategic planning committee uh since its inception. I have seen firsthand how intentionally this work has been grounded in community voice and data. After 12 years teaching in RSU5 and choosing to raise my family here, I am deeply invested both professionally and personally in the long-term strength of this district. The teacher affected by this proposed elimination is an exceptional educator as you've heard. She engages students across the full spectrum of learners as you've heard um ensuring meaningful growth for all. Uh unfortunately without her we're likely not going to be able to offer our computer programming uh program anymore. Um which has been a long-standing cornerstone of our STEM program since well before I started teaching here. Um, in that class, students who don't always see themselves reflected in other traditional social spaces, they find a community of like-minded peers. Uh, a place where curiosity and intellectual passion are celebrated.

This course exemplifies our commitment to inclusive learning environments where every student can discover and confidently pursue their passions.

She also provides something we can't quantify but deeply need. Visible female representation in STEM. Representation matters. When students see someone who reflect their identity thriving in advanced mathematics and technology, they are more likely to envision themselves in those fields. Her presence directly supports our commitment to diverse perspectives and belonging.

Her impact extends beyond the classroom.

um as a department chair. I'm also a department chair, so I sit in a lot of meetings with her. She shares research-based practices while completing her masters in education and has led efforts to reimagine the math curriculum through inquirybased learning. She prioritizes critical thinking, problem solving, and deep conceptual understanding, skills essential for the 21st century. In doing so, she strengthens the entire department and embodies our strategic plan's emphasis on innovation, collaboration, and relevance. As a district, we have intentionally invested in early career educators to strengthen long-term retention. When we lose talented young young educators, we undermine that investment. Sustainable excellence requires strategic retention, not short-term contraction.

Finally, this proposed cut will increase class sizes everywhere, making responsive instruction and meaningful relationships more difficult to sustain.

Our strategic plan emphasizes belonging, agency, cognitive growth, real world relevance, and inclusive culture.

Eliminating this position works against each of those pillars. Um, I'll skip through the rest. I respectfully ask that you consider not only the financial implications, but the long-term academic and cultural costs to our students in our district. Thank you for your consideration and everything you do for our district.

Thank you, Haley.

Let's move that down for Lisa. Thank you. Uh after after Lisa, I have Jill Highland.

Okay. Good evening. Um my name is Lisa Bler. I'm transitioning to talk about another proposed cut. I' I'm an English teacher, an alternative ed teacher. I've been teaching for over almost 30 years.

I have been at Freeport High School for 15 years now. And I have had the privilege of working alongside our community outreach coordinator. The proposal to cut this essential position in half is deeply concerning and truly reflects a grave misunderstanding of both its scope and its impact. This position supports students, families, staff, administrators, really the entire RSU5 community. Freeport High School's strategic plan, as Haley had spoken about, is to empower all students to learn and grow. And a core pillar of this vision is community connections.

That is one of our distinct goals at Freeport High School. Um, and it commits us to, and I quote directly from the strategic plan, fostering and maintaining relationships with local businesses, organizations, and community members in order to strengthen student engagement, student support, and learning through extended opportunities.

A genuine commitment to community connection requires a full-time community outreach coordinator. Reducing this position sends a clear message that this is not a priority. This position has a wide reaching impact on students, a variety of students, supporting students pursuing job shadows, um, matching students with professionals, whether it's architects, engineers, supporting students who are more interested in hands-on learning and skilled trades through field trips, guest speakers, career exploration, and it reaches students who have not yet figured out post-secary goals and serves as a bridge to those opportunities beyond beyond high school.

Through this position, I have had firsthand experience with um the person in this position bringing noted main authors such as Lily King, Lewis Robinson, Monica Wood um to our creative writing classes. Um for at risk students, this position has helped those who may feel disconnected find engaging opportunities and mentorship to support their success. from bringing Vietnam veterans into classrooms, connecting students to post-secary programs, and arranging career exploration in a variety of fields from boat building to heating and plumbing, farming, animal rescue, cosmetology.

Through this position, students find jobs and students find future careers.

Reducing this position would weaken a vital support system, one that directly impacts student success, community engagement, and the culture of Freeport High School. These opportunities are part of what makes Freeport High School special. And I know that as someone who has taught in other schools, this is unique, a place where families want to send their children. and RS35 is a community where people want to live with this full-time position held intact. I urge the board to reconsider this proposed cut, fully preserve this position. Um I also have sent an email that um goes further into detail about what the roles and responsibilities are.

I've only scratched the surface in these three minutes and um most importantly the impact of this full-time position. Thank you for your time. Thank you, Lisa. So, after Jill, I have Taylor Dumbres.

Hey, good evening. My name is Jill Highland.

I live in Brunswick and work at Freeport High School. I'm here tonight as an ESOL educator and as an advocate for the multilingual students of RSU5.

This fall, I stood before the board when the district revised and approved its Lao plan, a policy created to ensure that RSU5 meets its legal obligations to multilingual learners. Tonight, I am asking the board to remember that those commitments are not optional. They are grounded in federal law and in the Supreme Court decision in Lao versus Nichols, which makes clear that schools must do more than provide the same instruction. They must ensure multilingual learners can actually access it. The proposed budget includes the reduction of a full-time ESOL position across the district. Our team is asking to maintain three educators across two and a half positions, not to expand the program, but to preserve the minimum staffing necessary to deliver the services outlined in the Lao plan and to remain in compliance with state and federal expectations.

The number of student of multilingual students in RSU5 has not declined. We are serving essentially the same number of students this year as last year and we continue to provide services in five of the six schools in the district with three educators. The program is proactive, collaborative and aligned with our allow plan. With two educators covering five buildings prek to 12, our program becomes reactive, inconsistent, and stretched beyond what is educationally sound or legally defensible. As the district expands programming for three and four year olds, these service needs will only grow. The reduction would force services into a primarily pullout model, directly contradicting our own LA plan, which states that programs must minimize the isolation of multilingual learners from their peers whenever possible.

Guidance from the Department of Education states that multilingual learners must receive language support that allows them to meaningfully access grade level curriculum with language development and content learning happening at the same time. Instruction must be delivered by an endorsed ESOL teacher. It cannot be replaced by MTSS or RTI. Language is not a disability.

There was a comment that perhaps we've worked ourselves out of a job. In reality, we have done exactly what you asked us to do. We have provided and built independence through consist consistent structured support at the high school level alone. This cut eliminates dedicated language classes.

It eliminates co-eing. It limits collaboration and it replaces a structured research-based program with generalized support that no longer meets the expectations outlined in our allow plan. For the past four years, multilingual students in RSU5 have graduated, gone on to college because they had continuity, structured language instruction, and trusted adults guiding them through complex academic language tasks.

Continuity matters. Relationships matter. stability matters and the law matters.

Our multilingual learners depend on us to make decisions that protect their rights to meaningful access to education.

I want to be clear. I'm not here to protect my position. I have my resume ready. I'm going to land on my feet.

These kids don't have that same luxury.

They are depending on you to make this choice and protect their access for education. I ask the board to honor your commitments that you made in the fall with our new law plan. Thank you for your time.

Thank you, Jill.

Thank you.

And after Taylor, we'll have Sarah Davis.

Thank you. Hello, members of the RSU5 board and community members. My name is Taylor Dumbrosski. I'm a sixth grade student here at the Freeport Middle School. Last week, I was notified that French and world cultures may be removed from the curriculum at the middle school due to budget cuts. When I heard this, I knew I had to take immediate action to try and preserve this important subject.

So, that's why I'm standing before you today.

French is a foreign language. that is the fifth most spoken language in the world. In fact, 28 countries speak French and over 320 million people.

Learning this language means so much to me, especially as I believe that our world is a better place when we have a broader understanding of foreign cultures. In trimester 1, I was in world cultures and found I was learning more than just the language. I was learning culture, history, traditions, geography, and art. And so much more I could list on for days. If we lose French as a subject, this means Freeport Middle School students will lose the opportunity not only to learn a language, but also culture and history.

Many mayors speak French, and not to mention, so do our neighbors in Canada.

I want to go to a school that values creating opportunities, not taking them away. My point is, French is a language kid should discover at a young age and have the choice to continue to learn through high school and beyond. Our French teacher is a wonderful teacher who teaches amazingly. She's inspired me to want to learn more about the world around me. We are lucky to have her in our school and I hope we can find a way to keep her and this subject. I'm strongly requesting that the school board reconsider the proposal that removes French from our middle school curriculum. There must be another way to find money in the budget than to cancel an opportunity for kids to learn about foreign culture. Thank you for your time.

Thank you, Taylor. After Sarah, we have uh Jim Donahue.

You wow, that was amazing. Um, thank you, Taylor. Um, my name is Sarah Davis. I live in Auburn and I teach French and world cultures in grades six through eight at Freeport Middle School. Um, and I want to keep my comments brief. Um, I'm obviously devastated by the decision of the administrative team to cut French at Freeport Middle School. I worry that future budget proposals will continue to carve away at world language programs in the RSU. French is the most widely spoken language in Maine after English.

And Maine has a rich franophhone or French-speaking culture. Ironically, March is the month of La Francoi, celebrating the fact that there are over 321 million French speakers worldwide across five continents. The main reason I'm speaking here tonight is to thank all the wonderful people I have worked with over the past two decades at FMS. I have been privileged to work with so many amazing colleagues and cherished students during that time. And so, I just want to say thank you so much for enriching my life. Merci. Gracias.

Gazelle. Um, no. Willy Winnie, I'd also like to ask that you reconsider cutting the edtech positions um at FMS. We're stretched pretty thin at the middle school in terms of support staff and individuals whose jobs uh might be eliminated are extremely effective teachers. Um, and their elimination would be a great loss to the community. So, um, thank you so much.

Thank you, Sarah. After Jim, I have Jenna Shu.

Thank you. Good evening. My name is Jim Donahghue.

Um, I recently retired after 35 years at Panel School as the PE teacher, soccer coach, baseball coach, softball coach. I was a guidance counselor, the athletic director, and yes, I even drove the school bus.

Um, since retirement, I've had a a wonderful opportunity to assist with the ice skating program as well as the cross-country ski program with my son Trevor with fourth and fifth graders. Um, I've always maintained that Powell Elementary School, and this is my strong opinion, particularly when it was K through 8, I always felt that that's the way all children's education should be.

Um during these uh kindergarten and first grade skating programs, I always make a point of introducing myself and I always ask the parents about how their children's experience is here at Panel.

And without exception, these parents are just so enthusiastic and so um proud of what's happening for their children at Panel School. Um the Panel school experience, the pre-K through fifth grade school experience includes the ability to establish long-term, often lifetime personal relationships with classmates. You don't have this at other schools.

uh particularly when we were K through eight, children would know each other for eight, nine years, they would they would establish relationships with um with teachers, with the bus driver, with the lunch lady. Okay. Uh and again, this is very unique to a to a school. Um, at Pound School, the fifth graders have an opportunity to mentor the kind uh kindergarteners in the classroom as well um as well as on the playground. Pile school has a perfect environment for outdoor learning. The PE program that utilizes the outdoors with snowshoeing, cross-country skiing, ice skating, canoeing, and other activities as well, excuse me, um, as well as swim lessons at the YMCA. I believe these kinds of experiences make panel a truly special place. In the past three years, unfortunately, I have been to a number of uh former students or former students funeral uh funerals or celebrations of life. Many of these student ex- studentents are 40, 50, 55 years old and they always make a point of uh touching base with me and I can't tell you how many times they look back at their experience at PO school in a positive light. Um, and I'll finish up with this. Excuse me.

I am so fortunate to have taught at PO school over the years. It is truly the center of the panel community and sending the grade three through five students off to another school would be a disservice to the children of Panel as well as a disservice to the wonderful town of Panel. Thank you for giving me this time.

Thank you, Jim. After uh Jenna, I have Andy Seymour.

Hi everyone, my name is Jenna Shu and I live in Panel. I have a young daughter who will one day attend RSU5 schools.

So I just want to thank the board and superintendent for opening up a dialogue with our community to plan for the future. I think when community is involved in solving problems, the outcomes are always better, especially for children. And I have been spending some time researching the early childhood special education mandate because the question I've heard coming up again and again is where do we put the three-year-olds with IEPs? There's concern there's no space for the three-year-olds and there's timing pressure of the upcoming mandate. These two factors are also were framed as one of the primary drivers for the need to do a facility study sooner than later.

So again, the question still remains where do we put the three three-year-olds with IEPs? And I know that this board has discussed this too, but I just want to resurface that the main department of education is also trying to help us answer this. And they discuss implementing what's called a mixed delivery system. So what does that mean? So, a mixed delivery system is a system that allows us to partner with other child care facilities and licensed child care providers to support any overflow for children that have IEPs that are three years old that the current facilities can't support. So again, I know it was discussed I think in the February 11th meeting um about this and uh one of the board members asked what it would be look like to partner with community providers if that's a feasible solution to the space problem. And then the superintendent you answered that it was discussed with the early childhood task force and confirmed it was possible but you mentioned it wasn't ideal and it was better to do it within our own facility. But I wasn't quite sure about like who that's better for, what's that better for? And I just think kids that are three years old that have a disability who need individual education programs that need to be served in the least restrictive environment possible. I I question like if putting them through to a facility that we have as a three-year-old is always the best solution um versus like at home care and you know individualized support. So, I do definitely respect the perspective that it's one dedicated facility could be really great as well once all the foundation is set up, but the DOE published guidance in December specifically designed to address these concerns for many other districts. Um, and even my daughter's daycare, they're already getting up to speed on how they can actually better position themselves to accept um students with IEPs.

So really the question is whether the mandate here requires us to to create more facilities to support these three-year-olds. Um and based on the main DOE's answer is that it does not necessarily require this. And then two, one of the things I I was researching is that six hours per week is the minimum time requirement to support three-year-olds with IEPs per week. I'm not saying you'd ever want to strive for the bare minimum to support these children, but just to be clear that this mandate is not a full-time requirement for three-year-olds with IEPs. Um, so I guess my next thought is that I just was like thinking about if if it's been discussed a lot around I know I can't ask questions, but just like thinking about the process, I think I feel like I'm missing information about if we've talked about a mixed delivery system and what that might entail. Um, I know this whole this whole mandate is is amazing for children, but I it's going to be a huge administrative toll um to keep up with all the requirements. The DOE is publishing training tutorials mult, you know, every few weeks. There's new information all the time. Um, lastly, another point I want to make is that I want to confirm when this mandate is happening for our district. So I know in the planning for futures proposal on February 11th, it was listed in that document that the mandate deadline was July 2027 and then there was an article put forward recently in the Portland Press Herald um that was written that deadline was actually July 2028.

So if the 2028 deadline in July is accurate for this mandate for us to start uh applying this mandate then we've been given the extra time a gift of a year and there's definitely I think a lot of good roadmap and resources from the state and our surrounding towns who are of course trying to figure this out together. So, I'm just wondering, yeah, if the just thinking about the the funding of a major facility study and appropriating up to $100,000 for that, if there might also be a need to start hiring a consultant or something to start supporting our district, focusing more on how we might make this work for the kids. um might be really interesting because again like these are individual education programs um that need to be working best for the individual not necessarily best for administrative burden. So lastly, I do agree that a facility studies can also and probably will be really important for this and for moving our our district forward for the future and for like improved capital asset planning, management, all of that good stuff. But based on DOE's guidance, the mandate for supporting early childhood education for students with disabilities does not seem to require us to come up with more space. And I think that's a really important fact for the community and the board to understand in our planning. So, thank you for your time. I really appreciate it.

Thank you, Jenna. After Andy, I have Rick Wilson.

Uh, hi everybody. Uh, Andy Seymour. I'm from Powell. Um, be before you go, I'll shrug and sigh and say, "Oh no, another Pel Angry Resident." Uh, I come with invitations tonight. So, it's going to be positive. I apologize for the sunglasses. I got an eye injury. I'm not going to sing Sunglasses at night, but if you make a motion and second it, I'm not totally against it, but um I want I uh I moved to Powell because um I grew up in a small town. I wanted to live in a small town. I saw people starting berry farms. I saw saw people starting farms and farm stores and all the rural things. there's open spaces and I wanted to participate in that. Um I also the uh the 9-year-old woman that runs the gas station refused to put card readers on the gas um machines. So people would actually come in the store and have conversations with each other. So what I uh noticed was that mindset coalesces uh at the school and there's a lot of uh intangibles that make powell uh unique which uh Mr. D talked about a lot today and my modest dream when in town was to create a sugar shack. So it's sugar shack season and Val's been to the sugar shack if you need an endorsement of that. So, um, the first year ever to have a PES sugar shack field trip was the the year my son was in kindergarten.

And this year, my younger son will be in kindergarten. And I've made the commitment to always um to the the lovely and perfect Kate Dawson that will always have PES kindergarten Sugar Shack tours. And um that's coming up next Friday. Tom, I will send you and everyone an invite to that. So, I'm hoping you will all show up. Um, I also learned uh we have poetry enthusiasts on the board. Is that true or not true?

So, I I brought a little something that I'd like to to read and uh I think a theme we had a couple weeks ago was uh pedantic. Let's try not to be pedantic about the spelling, please. These are five year olds. So, but I wanted to share with if I could dear Andy Heather and Maple. Maple's the yellow lab if anyone's interested. I I very original I know. So, sticky sticky syrup that tastes so sweet. You are fun to make and you are more fun to eat.

Thank you for the syrup and the visit and everything. Love all the kids and Mrs. Dawson. So maybe next time we could Colin, maybe you could help workshop the next poem next Friday.

So I'll Tom, I'll send you the invite.

Everyone's invited. I want to I want to show why the uh the intangible things.

Let's make them more tangible so you can understand what makes Panel a special place. Thank you. Thank you, Andy.

So, after Rick, I have Kate Martins. Good evening. My name is Rick Wilson.

I'm the uh community outreach extended learning coordinator at Brunswick High School and I'm speaking from both professional experience and personal conviction about the value of maintaining a full-time community outreach coordinator, Freeport High School. First, I want to acknowledge the district's vision because years ago, RSU5 created this full-time position, and that decision has positively impacted the lives of thousands of students. I'm encouraging the board to once again show that same visionary leadership by keeping this role full-time.

Central to the vision is the community outreach coordinator. and your community outreach coordinator has served with incredible distinction um being a model creating a model program. when I was creating uh Brunswick's program, I looked to hear um your coordinator is a collaborator statewide has um an amazing uh amount of respect for from everybody and if she wasn't so they were not so humble um we would have packed the place tonight with um various colleagues that uh feel the same way that I do. And I know you've received some emails um today and one from me as well. Um I think of their impact as much like a five tool player in baseball. In baseball, coaches talk about the rare value of a five tool player. Someone who can hit for average, hit for power, run, field, and throw.

They impact every part of the game. A five tool player doesn't just fill the position. They influence outcomes in ways you often can't predict. That's the impact that a community outreach coordinator makes. And that's the impact this community coordinator makes every day in Freeport. Across Maine, more than 75 schools have community outreach professionals doing this work. None of these positions are part-time, and I don't know how it can be part-time.

Community outreach coordinators are especially valuable because of how interconnected their work is. When they help a student find a meaningful opportunity, that improves engagement.

It improves attendance and purpose. When they build partnerships in the community, those opportunities open doors for other teachers and programs.

When they support a struggling student, they help keep that student connected to school.

Reducing this rule to halftime doesn't simply reduce hours. It reduces relationships, opportunities, and access for students. In baseball, when you have a five tool player, you don't take them off the field for half the game. You keep them in the lineup because they make everyone around them better. Please don't reduce the momentum of a program and partnership that took years to build. I urge you to consider not just a line item, but the long-term impact on the students and on the Freeport community. Thank you. Thank you, Rick.

So, after Kate, I have Jack Broen.

Hi, my name is Kate Martins. I'm from Powell. Together with a group of parents who have evaluated proposal 2 through the lens of educational policy. I've looked at a range of studies on outcomes of rural school dissolution.

We were overwhelmed by the research. In study after study, the results were consistent. Closing community schools is bad for students. I want to briefly address the term dissolution. I realize that if scenario 2 moves forward, Panel will still have a school, but it will not be the school that Panel community members are fighting for. It will not be the place where teachers have created a cohesive, vertically aligned, seven-yearong curriculum for our children. If scenario 2 is enacted, the town's youngest students will go to school in Panel, but they will only make up about 10% of the children who attend the program. After one year, or possibly two if they qualify, they'll leave like every child in the school. After making the transition into the EC program, these five or six year olds from across the district will face another unnecessary transition. This doesn't sound like best practice. In addition to looking at academic research, our group also sought to understand the stated goals of RSU5. So we examined the official documents prepared and published in 2008. This body of documents laid the groundwork for RSU5's official formation in 2009 and remains crucial today. In the reorganization plan document, page two presents the primary goal of RSU5's formation, which is quote to enhance and improve learning and teaching opportunities across the three communities. End quote. I feel it is the responsibility of this board to respect and protect this goal. On pages 26 and 27, the wording is precise.

Quote, "The new RSU RSU board should view the different schools as resources that may help to personalize the education of students. In general, decisions of placement of students in a school within the RSU should be based upon what is best educationally for the child." End quote. Later in that same document, two of the five bullet points on the quote establishment of attendance areas end quote were in direct conflict with scenario two. These points are three maintaining established neighborhood groupings and four transportation efficiencies.

It is impossible to argue that scenario 2, if enacted, would quote enhance and improve learning opportunities unquote for panel students. If PES students are bus to and absorbed into existing classes at Durham Community School, the result would yield more time spent on buses and less favorable studenttoteer ratios in classrooms.

These are measurable factual inputs and they contradict the stated objectives and scope of RSU5's founding principles.

Thank you for your time. Thank you, Kate. and Jack.

And that was the last person I had on the list. So, is that still accurate? Okay.

Thank you.

My name is Jack Broen and I'm a senior here at the high school. I'm here to talk about the cut of one of the math positions at the high school. I'd like to preface that I'm not just here to complain. I actually really want to thank Superintendent Gray for coming to RSU5. I've actually saw you at more games this fall than I ever saw some of your predecessors. So, that was great.

Um, but I've looked at the budget cut tiers and it seems to me, superintendent, the board have settled on a narrative that a shrinking student body justifies shrinking the core staff to students. I think that's a convenient but sterile way to look at a school.

Instead of cut, cut, cut, we need to be honest about why that enrollment is dropping so fast. and it's dropping because families are choosing other options. An option my family chose was four years ago when we chose to move back to Freeport because it was home. We left Portland because the schools there were a mess and we came here for the stability and the standard this district represents. But I have to be honest, the over 10% enrollment drop cannot be due only to the housing crisis that exists in other school districts and across this whole state. I think some families are leaving because they've lost confidence in the day-to-day experience here. They're packing up and choosing to go to private schools like Chevver and Wayne that are sometimes nearly an hour commute. And every time you propose to cut a st a core staff member who is vital to both the planning and teaching part of this building, you may be giving another family one more reason to pack up, accelerating the exact decline you're using to justify these cuts. I had FHS math 1.0 from geometry my first year here. I didn't go into her room as a math person by any means, and I'm still not. Miss McQuin can attest she turned a graduation requirement into a place where students and a lot of whom were not math people actually engaged.

She doesn't just process a curriculum, she genuinely teaches. She runs the freshman mentor program. She coaches and she even started a crochet club. She does the invisible essential work that keeps this building from falling apart.

Every year on the first day of school, the senior class sits through a graduation slideshow. an adviser during the first day of school when you want to go out and enjoy with your friends. You sit there in the fpack and listen to the talk of one day everyone who starts here will graduate here and one day we will reach that 100% graduation rate. But I think that goal starts to feel hollow if the people in this room that are pushing that idea are also deciding to gut the staff that actually build and sustain it. Maybe that sounds harsh, but I really don't know how else to put it put it. Regardless, on June 13th, the class of 2026 will be on the stage at Merryill Auditorium. The teacher, FHSM Math 1.0, will be there with us, too, regardless of what happens, watching the students she taught, including myself, walk across. I hope you'll all be there, too.

It's a pretty good setting to see the result of your priorities. When you're sitting there in June watching the class of 2026 graduate, you'll be looking at students who made it through in part because of the teacher you're currently choosing to cut. I just hope you find that view as impressive as I do. Thank you.

Thank you, Jack. Okay. Um, all right. So, we will move on to uh well, first I want just want to take a moment to say thank you for everyone who came and spoke. I know that's not always the easiest and I know folks have uh important things and families and so I appreciate everyone taking the time um and obviously also the emails we receive. Um but thank you thank you for the public comment. Um all right so continuing with our agenda uh item eight report from the superintendent.

So I have two resignations to report tonight. one is listed on the agenda.

That's Amy Broadbent from Laugh and Learn Before Care. And then also not on the agenda, um Erica Mazo, the assistant superintendent of curriculum instruction and assessment has tended her resignation effective the end of the school year.

Okay. Um, so, uh, that will prompt a search and we'll hear more about that. Okay. Okay.

Um, all right. So, we will move on. We do not have any administrator reports, board committee reports, policy this evening. We will move right into item 12, which is unfinished business for the budget. Okay.

So, I have some remarks tonight to kind of frame the ongoing discussion that we're going to have around the budget. And the audience has left.

um some of the audience.

I was gonna say I had actually I I had um looked forward to a chance to talk to just sort of have present for this discussion some of the staff members who have offered perspective. Um and I I think I want to say again I said last meeting I write remarks and I kind of like 50% follow them. So, I'm not on script at the moment and um I don't think that I heard any invalid comments from the staff. Um I heard comments that strongly reflect that perspective and those are those are valid. Um, but as we continue the discussion, what I'd like to return to is a theme that I drew out in previous meetings. Um, and to try to connect some dots over the course of time of the discussions we've had because I think that that's an important lens. In fact, for me, it's the most important lens through which to view the entire conundrum we're facing. and that is that it is very easy to get to focus on the reductions that are right in front of you.

Every reduction actually represents hours of discussion about what are we keeping and how are we finding the proposal to reduce that is the least impact to kids.

And that's true for every one of the recommendations that's in the 8% tier, the 7% tier, the 6% tier. All of those represent discussions from as many angles as we could think of on the team about we have criteria by which to shape this discussion largely informed by staff feedback early in the year. Where do we how do we get to 7% 8% 6% Those represent our insight about what is the least impact on kids. Um they none of them were developed casually or lightly.

Um they also I can assure you are all sound proposals from the perspective of our legal obligations. every single one of them. Um they reflect very careful consideration about where reductions might occur occur in order to really sustain the core experiences that matter the most.

And that is not to say that everything on the table doesn't have value in itself.

It's just that if everything is a priority, nothing is a priority.

That's really where we are. If everything is a priority, then nothing is a priority and we have to make choices. So later this evening, I'm going to share some information that helps illustrate what those preserved programs and opportunities look like. Um Kelly has actually passed something out that we've developed since the packet was and and we can turn our attention to that in a bit, but that's in an effort to demonstrate what we will be preserving um even if we make reductions.

Um, I will also be able to share some thinking about what a budget that's somewhere between the first and second tier looks like because I've heard some requests from board members of what what we would do to get there. So, I can talk about that. With that stated, I I will say plainly I still recommend the 7% tier um largely because of what I showed you at the last board meeting about where it goes over the long term. I don't know if that looks familiar, but um another connection that I'd like to draw as we talk about this further is just where next year's budget fits into the conversations that have now been started about sustainability beyond next year.

Um and I have to admit that as I worked with Jenny to sort of plan out this, I thought about I was a high school history teacher. How am I going to plan this unit? Where are we going to start? And where are we going to arc and where are we going to end? Um, definitely purposefully structured. This is how I would have structured a unit in a high school class because there is a theme and I'm going to develop that theme more explicitly.

Now, it's been somewhat implicit and tonight it's be it's going to become more and more explicit. And the theme is basically whatever we do with this year's budget is our launching pad for wherever we go next.

And I don't think we can lose sight of that. So over the past couple of meetings, I've shared some scenarios that look at how we might position this district for long-term sustainability.

Um I and we have used the term long-term sustainability.

I would actually argue that the ideas that I've presented are really medium-term ideas. They're not actually long-term ideas. Though the things that we've talked about now are the things that we'll need to have a solution for within a number of school years that you can count on one hand, but there's also the two-hand stuff that we really have to be thinking about now. Um, for example, we've alluded to some of these, but we haven't really put them on the table yet.

How long can we really realistically expect all of our facilities to hold up before we have to make a major investment? More street comes to mind right away. I don't think more street's going to kill over right now, but I would bet sometime within this many years, we're going to have to do something about more street. That's just a guess, but I think it's a good guess.

Is there a point where the discussion about middle school I think one of the as I listened after I put some ideas out there for discussion, one thing that seems to resonate loudly with many many people is middle school integration.

And I'm also hearing integrating all the middle schools at seventh grade is probably good, but sixth grade is even better.

I don't think we get to sixth grade without some kind of major investment, a facilities investment. Freeport Middle School cannot house six, seven, and eight from the whole district. Even if we wanted to do that, and I don't know that we want to, but we couldn't right now. We don't have a solution for that.

Um, another thing that we have to think about, and that in fact I was just discussing today with the Freeport town manager, is our vehicle fleet. We do not have and this district has not had a good solution for how to house and repair the vehicle fleet for quite some time now. Has that risen with the the imminent issues that we are discussing? Has that risen to the top of the list?

Absolutely not. We're sharing a facility with the town of Freeport. We don't actually have anou to do it. We pay, I think, $13,000 a year to share that facility. It doesn't have a lift if we need to fix a bus, so we have to outsource it. It really isn't enough space. And what Sophie's comment to me was is that we are getting to the point of bursting at the seams. We'll need a solution for that at some point.

Um, so those are some very concrete, like literally brickandmortar things to think about with long-term sustainability, but it's really more than that. That's where my thinking starts. The sustainability is really about our people because that's what schools are really all about. Both from the perspective of the kids in the schools and the adults in the schools.

So, just to kind of circle back to an original point, we know that one of the biggest reasons why we're facing a cliff right now is because salary, wages, salaries, and benefits are going to go up substantially next year due to contractual obligations.

And I said it then and I'll say it again that that's actually a good thing for this district. We need to be a district that pays people well and competitively so that we are attracting and keeping the best people in an environment where the districts around us are certainly adopting that mindset.

Um that's extremely important.

So yes, we have a decision to make around how we cope with that. But I do think if I look back at I wasn't part of previous negotiations, I think that was a good investment in the district.

There is a flip side to it and that is that if we want to have competitive compensation for our staff, we cannot necessarily maintain every position if we're coming up against it. We cannot necessarily prioritize both things.

There have to be choices and the choices are yours, not mine. But that is a lens through which I'm seeing it, especially in the environment in which we now live. If we look at this through a broad district-wide lens, but also a short-term versus long-term lens, which is again one of the classic ethical dilemmas that I've talked about in the past, we should be looking to be able to ensure that our people are compensated fairly and competitively.

And we have to weigh that against what positions we preserve and we shouldn't be wanting or um careless in striking that balance but there is a balance to be struck.

This also does not mean and I want to be careful in the way I and very deliberate in the way I say this that the positions that have been identified for reduction I am not saying that they lack value.

I'm not saying that they are extra. Um, every position that we have right now does contribute to the work that we do and there are some wonderful individuals in some of those positions that have been labeled for reduction. I need to go I need to state very plainly we cannot consider the board cannot consider we could not consider as administrative team who is in those positions when we made this these recommendations. We have to follow the contract that was mutually negotiated.

We can't talk about people. We have to talk about positions. That is the only fair way to have that conversation.

So what it means is that we have to curate the resources that we have as carefully as possible for now so that over the long term we can continue to pay people well.

And to put that into more immediate perspective, right now we're negotiating a support staff contract.

Next year we're negotiating the educator contract again.

So the financial decisions we make right now around this budget will determine what we're able to do in those negotiations.

They determine what our wiggle room is. They determine what our options are.

And when you step back and look at the full landscape, these are only some of the challenges that this district will face in the time before the current kindergarteners will graduate from high school. That's like that two-hand range. So, they're not hypothetical. They're just not right in front of us.

And I'm not sure if this is the way budgets have been presented in the past or talked about, but that's the way I want to talk about it and that's the way I see it. So that's the that is the perspective that I'm trying to bring and I think the team is trying to bring when we present very painful decisions to you.

Um and the truth is we there's going to be any number of unknown factors that intervene before in in the years ahead.

I mean I don't even know what the price of gas is going to be next week. I'm pretty sure it's going to be high.

Um, but I I definitely know this. Our future flexibility, our our ability to pay people well, our ability to build the new building when we need to build it, to adapt, to have the right programs that we need is definitely very much contingent upon the choice that is made with this year's budget. It's not just about balancing the numbers for next year. It's about the position we are in to go forward um and look to the future.

That's really what I got.

Um, Kelly has some information that I'd like to have her share. Um, first, Kelly, do you want to talk about reserve accounts? What do you want to talk about first, Kelly? We have reserve accounts. We have the spreadsheet of what we keep versus what we save.

I think maybe talk about the spreadsheet. Um, keep versus save. And do we do we want to project it for the audience and for those at home?

I think that would be great.

Um Sam, can you turn I'll just I just kind of want to walk through this the spreadsheet for you. Um we won't necessarily go line by line unless you want to. Um I just want to conceptually talk about the sheet. um how to read it and um I don't know how to fill space when I need to talk about the spreadsheet itself. So um it it comes at the request um I think Anna's asked for it a couple of times um in order for her to to make an informed decision. She kind of wanted to know if we made cuts what it would look like. I didn't go to all the levels of staffing.

I didn't do like office secret office secretary support um the print clerk.

What I focused on were um educators and education educational technicians.

All right. So start mirroring.

I don't see the library yet.

Okay, Sam, the library is not showing up today.

It's usually right at the top. Scrolling backwards is throwing me off.

No, it's the right way.

You want to send this to me and I'll try to send you.

Oh, I have multiple that I was gonna multiple sheets.

All right, let me see if I can get little technical difficulty. I'll just for for those at home um I have requested that Jenny put this on the website as well but I will just conceptually start talking through it for the board. Um so it's broken down into uh different categories. So at the top the at the very beginning is general education. So those are all the general education classrooms. Um, and as you've all learned as over time, the configurations at Durm Community School and the middle school are different for when you get into like the sixth, seventh, and eighth grades. And so what looks like it's a duplicative it's duplicate. Durham uses like a 78 kind of model and Freeport Middle School uses a 678 model. So there's a lot more lines than I would have liked to have been on here, but it was the best way to show truly what was there. So, um that starts with gened. There's educators at the top. It then goes into like um wellness, PE, music, band, chorus, drama, art, Latin, French, and Spanish. We then get into general ed, ed techs, and that is you utilizing the pre um prek edte, library edte, study hall, and what we we call bench sub. There is one left, and it looks like Sam, I can get it now.

Um, yeah. Um, and then we go into what I'm considering more, they're educator positions within a CBA, but they're more like specialist in the sense of, um, nurse, guidance counselors, um, social work, librarians, multilingual, um, gifted and talented, and then the our instructional and strategists. And I did reflect JMG even though they're contractual to the district and they're not actually our employee they are they are providing classroom space in the schools especially in DRM's configuration. So I wanted to make sure to represent that on here. Um and then we get into um MTSS which is the RTI type programs. I continued with the same model of educators and educational technicians and I broke it down um for the teaching. So MTSS the math and literacy for the for the for the teachers that's RTIA right because it's the academic but it is broken down between math lit and then literacy and then M MTSS behavior is the RTIB program that we have been talking about it then I then go on to the early intervention team which are those that we discussed that will actually they'll remain our they're on our teaching staff now within our local budget. This is the team that's going to be supporting the 4-year-old CDS transition. So, their funding source will move to um the CDS money. However, um they'll still be part of the education team. So, I kept them on here. Um and then we move into the Ramos special education. We have educators, the educational technicians, and then specialist. And in that category, it's like the special education coordinators, teacher of a deaf, social work, speech, language pathologist, OT, PT, school psych, and BCBA.

So that kind of like walks down through the list. Um, and then it's by school as you can see, More Street, Mass Landing, PES, DCS, FMS, FHS, and then there's a total column collectively.

And then we'll just move over to the yellow boxes. That's 2627. This is showing you with based upon the superintendent's recommended tier of reduction what the impact actually looks like. Um it's it continues in the same flow. It's just and what I tried to do were the items in red. If you kind of like scroll down the sheet and we'll look at the first example at Mass Landing. It was a grade three teacher.

So you can see that it's red because there we're going from five to four in that grade level with the recommended budget. Um just talk about the the numbers at the top. I mean it's probably self-explanatory, but I'll just mention that the bold numbers that are like for classroom educators that is like the total for that whole column within that category. So those are all the educators within the gener gened classrooms for those particular schools. The numbers at the very top are combining all of the positions together. So, it's taking all of the educators, teachers, and specialists from all of the various levels and adding that total at the very top just just to put it in perspective like here here are the FTE for edte and ed and um teachers for 2526.

Here's what it will look like if we move forward with a SE superintendent's recommended level of cuts.

And I tried to make it so you could still see it. Uh hopefully it's not too small, but again, if it is, it's available online in PDF form and you can make it a little bigger. So, I just wanted to provide that context. Um again, it's not every position that we're proposing to eliminate. I didn't um because we get we would get into way too many multiple tiers and trying to So the two that aren't on here are um the print clerk um and then the um reduction of the community outreach coordinator because not under the collective bargaining agreement um and then um the reduction of the um secretarial support at the middle school, the halftime reduction there.

Okay. So, if there aren't any questions about this spreadsheet. Oh, it looks like Karen has one. Michelle, is it okay if I acknowledge her instead of you?

Okay.

Sorry. Um, thanks for this, Kelly. Um, I just wanted to make sure that I'm understanding the specialists on the second page.

We don't have a teacher of the deaf, but we're losing half an FTE.

So, that one is actually in the positive. So, instead of a negative, it's a positive. Okay. Just wanted to make sure.

Yeah. Sorry. Thank you for pointing that out. Within special education, we were adding two positions. That's where the change is. So, the there we're adding a 0.5 teacher of the deaf. Currently, that is being funded. Um we could not fill the position. So, we we're doing a contractual service. Um and that is being funded with rescial ed article 2 reserve. And then we are also um we there is a contractual speech language pathologist that we had posted but also could not fill. um that person is also being paid out of reserve and but it was proposed to add to this year's budget because as as we'll talk about it kind of leads into reserves a little bit but one thing that we did talk about the estab when we established the article reserves is that if they would either be used for a one-time expense that was not going to continue on and we wouldn't want to necessarily spike the tax rate for or it's an unplanned expense that shows up much like these two positions um that show up through the year, but they're an ongoing expense. So, they're they're they only get paid out of reserve for one year, then we pull it forward to the board to include in our local budget. Chris, um I noticed that in the ESOL category, it looks like we we added a need at Pel for ESOL. Is that correct?

based upon so it's not that we added a need we built in space for because currently there aren't any students in pel but with the current the model moving forward of two when I spoke with um assistant superintendent this is how the allocation would break out and there would be room for that person to be in Durham and pees as well if needed it's basically a cushion gotcha okay but we don't have any we don't have any need that we see at this point. Is that right?

In Yeah. No. Right.

But that doesn't mean that somebody doesn't move in like we experienced before couple days before school a couple years ago if you all remember correctly. So it wasn't necessarily in panel but um it was in the other communities. Um, and so basically what I tried to do is show I asked what does it look like this year? What is it anticipated to look like next year? And there is space built in in the event that there's a need in dur panel and that represents 0.25.

Any other Valerie? Thank you. I know Michelle can't see me.

Um, this is a question more broadly that is just I'm just trying to understand what made me think of it was ESOL, but I think there are a couple other shared services site folks. How do we budget the transition time from site A to site B? Is that something that's accounted for anywhere?

We pay mileage and we do account for it, but I don't know exactly which line.

Well, we don't I mean a teacher gets paid for a certain number number of hours whether they're traveling to or from our site midday. A lot of times what we try to do in most cases is actually because we'll get a little more complicated. School times are all different, right?

Depending upon what school you're at, times are different. Especially if it's like the BCBA is one person districtwide.

They may or may not like visit more than one building in a day. Sometimes you try to consolidate schedules if if speech services are needed at a particular school. you would consolidate them all to one day potentially if you could depending upon you know so we really try to work to reduce mileage if at all possible and to maximize time but that's not necessarily always possible but the travel time unless it's if if so I'll be careful with this if somebody starts their day in panel and they work in panel all day and I'm not like paying them from home to panel but if somebody started their day in panel but that had to go to Durm to service students and ended their day there, they could put in for mileage reimbursement from Panel to Durham, right? So, if you transition from one building to the other um and that's contractual through the collective bargaining agreement um that we pay mileage to those to those staff members and obviously they're getting paid to drive over there because it's during the workday. So, if there is a trade distance that Thank you. I was just wondering the mechanics of that. Yeah, clustering is usually best though and so it's just easier on people's scheduling too if we can follow that.

We'll get it.

I know you think you have a teacher's voice, but um to follow up on that. So, if it's a contract a if it's one of the subcontractors, what I'm going to call a subcontractor, like you said, the you couldn't fill the position and so you contracted off, is that person hired on the salary scale or do they negotiate their own salary? And if they negotiate their own salary, is it hourly or is it salary salary.

No. So, um the we're using agencies that these people work for. So, it's a contractual agreement with the agency.

We pay the agency, not the person. Um and it's typically an hourly rate.

Do they get paid for their travel and for their full? Not by us. By the agency. Got it.

But do we pay the agency that? Um I have not seen that travel separate.

It looks like it's included in the overall cost. I haven't seen it broken out separately. Thank you.

But the partic the two people that I highlighted are at one building. Oh, they're at one building anyway. Yes. Yeah. Yeah.

But I don't see that they're charging us mileage for that person to commute from their place of employment to us.

Thank you. And we always continually post for those positions just in the home as the superintendent said off of Mike.

Um we do post for those positions. Just I don't want you to get in trouble tomorrow. Um so um we do have those positions posted. Um, and we have kept those positions posted and we regularly monitor whether or not anyone applies because we do have um, even though we have a contractual agreement, we do have an out with that contractual agreement in the event that we find a staff member because obviously we would like to hire the staff member versus contract.

Are we ready to move on to reserve accounts? Okay. So, in in your purple packet, there was a a new handbook, but the only thing new in the handbook are the last two pages.

So, um and we had talked about this um in the p the past couple of years, we've established what we call article reserves. Um, and articles reserves are set up, as I mentioned briefly before.

They're they're by article, as we'll just back up a little bit. Our budget is appropriated by article. As we all know, when we go to the annual budget meeting, when you guys sign the warrants, we have an article for regular instruction. We have an article for special education, um, student and staff support, school administration, system administration, transportation, facilities. I'm not going to name them all, but um and so in an effort to try and stabilize the budgets for like I said either larger one-time expenses or actually um putting contingencies in um for the whatifs or what if three students come in and it's pushing us over our class- size policy and now we have to do something about it. Um we we establish these article reserves using undesated fund balance.

Undesated fund balance is the amount of money that's left over at the end of the year from our budget that we have not expended or we have overolcted on a revenue.

And ultimately we don't have authority to spend that until it's approved through the budget process and on a warrant article uh at the annual budget meeting. So couple of year not last year the year before we established the article reserve accounts and so annually we talk about what the balance is in them. Do we want to add to them? Do we feel like they're comfortable? you know, a comfortable balance. And I like to also report about what we're using them for. Um because while we come to the board for things and that we're expecting to expend for um sometimes at the beginning of the year and we're talking about budget in January or March or April, right? So I'll just walk you through um where we're at with our current established ones. um article one regular instruction. There was no use in 2526 for that. Um as you'll remember previous in a previous last year we used it for a teacher at Mass Landing School that ended up being needed. But the current balance in that account and we're not proposing to add any is $416,637.

It's about three and a half almost four teaching positions if we actually needed to add them back or if there was a need that arose.

Okay. And then I will move now down to article two, special education. Um, again, that's one of our um larger items that we've expended from in for the past two years. Um there we started a balance this year with $954,81.

And I'll just remind everybody the reason that that we we put almost a 500 $600,000 influx into that line last year because when we were doing the budget process last year, we weren't sure if we were going to have um ESCA funds or local entitlement funds. So, we actually pushed um the amount that we receive in local entitlement into this, which puts it at the $954,81.

because we had some use this year. We're looking to replenish a little bit. Um, so I'm proposing that we use 200,000 from the undesated account to refund the article 2 reserve account. What we've used it for is some one-on-one nursing that was needed. Um, a teacher of the deaf at 0.5 and a speech language pathologist.

Um, currently the one-on-one nursing that this was proposed for, that is no longer needed. So, we had a small expense and it's why you don't see it added back into the budget where you see the teacher of the deaf and the speech language pathologist came back through in the budget process this year. So, with those expenditures and the replenishment, it would leave article 2 around 964,000.

Article five, student and staff support. um that is has a balance of $6,768.

We don't feel that there's a need to increase that, but we will keep and maintain that account.

Article six, system administration, that is where the school board op is is budgeted, my office is budgeted and the superintendent's office is budgeted within the system administration lines. Um that is where you see the audit.

That's where you see if we do um strategic planning or any like to those types of things that's typically running through this line. Um we're proposing to add 140,000 in previous years. We used it for the strategic planning um because that was like I want to say it's a one-time thing. It's a every so many year type of thing. Um so we weren't we wouldn't need that money in the budget.

But one of the things that has kind of come clear as as we've been through the last couple of weeks is that there may be some professional fees related to whatever we're going to look at in regards to what the district looks like in in over the next 10 years or what the future of the district is. Um and so we don't know if we're going to spend the money. So we also so we don't want to put it in the local budget, but what we'd like to do is to allocate some of that money out of undesated and into this article 6 reserve in the event that something comes up for the board that we may need to actually expend some funds on that isn't a normal expenditure as part of that process.

Is that in addition to the facility study?

Yes, it is. Yeah, you'll see the facility study a little later in the capital. Um, and you know, this this could be this could be a variety of things. We talked about earlier today in the facilities committee when we were looking at the RFQ. Um, you know, we may decide from that that we can do the large facility study, but then what if next year the board wants to say, okay, let's dig deeper into something at the middle school or let's dig deeper into something here, there, or whatever, which would require like further investigation into. So, we wanted to make sure the board had the flexibility of the funds in order to do that. So, we're proposing to add 140,000 um and saying maybe 150. It's really just trying to, you know, to to have some sort of fund for you to do that in. Um, if we put that in and take it out, it brings us down to about $3,000. Um, again, it only gets spent if it's needed. Um, and then we had put uh 60,000 in when we established the article reserves for transportation because that is one of another one of those areas if you had an out of district placement and you have to transport children there's an additional transportation cost for that that we don't necess that we're currently not budgeting for. So we have um that um reserve account. Just to explain where they sit, they're still considered part of our undesated fund. they're just reserved for a particular purpose. Um, so if you're looking at our audit, you will you will see on the undesated, not that all of you are really like doing some heavy reading, but if you look on our audit when it when it gets published within the next few weeks here, you'll see that under the undesated where it's it's listing out all of the components of undesated fund balance, it's in the reserved column. It'll show you like article one reserve and show you that it's adding up there.

So the total balance at the end of next year if we move forward with it as proposed would be the article reserves would have um $1,450,000 in them.

I Valerie, sorry.

Do we keep so much in special ed or as earmarked as special ed because of the possibility of of a high need student where we need to place them outside the district or is are there other reasons? That's exactly the purpose.

Um yes be it's so so in the process you have students in a referral right um which means that they could they maybe they could possibly end up in a in an out of district placement or they may not we might be able to program with in-house for them. This would allow for both things. Right? if we if we did decide we could keep them, if we just added this staff member or this particular service, we would have a a pot to go to to tap into that or if we if we strictly had to put them out. Um the other thing is the cost of a residential placement is very significant. Um there are districts around us that have recently had students move in with residential placements and they were looking for ways to fund that. Um so that's why we're we are holding it there um and and trying to replenish back to that level.

So um just so I I understand um this assumes so there's some additions in the upcoming year, right? So 200 for special ed to replenish and then 140 into system admin. Um but the amounts coming out of special ed are the ones in this year not next year's. Correct. Correct.

Whereas the one in article um six is next year's expense.

Why? It was just why are you putting that money in? So and so I was trying to identify what the thought process was behind it that that's a possibility. The the nurse, the teacher, the deaf and the speech language that's in this current year showing. So I was just trying to show the draw down. Got it. Okay. And then um so that million450 assumes we spend all 150 that we correct out of there. Okay.

Correct. Thank you.

Yeah. It's the total of that outside column.

Uh so moving on to what we um versus article reserves. They're more what we consider facility reserves. This is encompassed by capital projects tennis courts and the tennis and track and then um some fuel reserves that we have for our facilities. Um so the capital projects balance um at the beginning uh where we ended at last year with the what we put in we ended at 2,420,000 with the amount that we put in in 2526.

And these are the expenditures or the they're either fully expended or anticipated expended before the end of this year or the timing may work out a little weird on the facility study depending upon when we can get it out and get it done and when payments are due. Um but um the PES septic finally got replaced. Um the total cost of that was actually 290,474 and I will say that as part of that the playground was disturbed and so we had to replace some playground components.

That's part of the number that's included in the PES septic um plan here.

Um life safety and cam life safety projects which were camera and door access. Um, as we recall last year we had brought forward a life safety proposal and we were initially proposing to use strictly undesated a fund balance to pay for it.

With all of the uncertainty that we had around title funds and um rampant funding, um the board chose to move particular projects into undesated fund balance versus um spending the undesated the full undesated amount on all projects.

So, it was it was split between local budget and um capital projects. The two items that stayed into the capital projects fund were cameras and door access. The expected amount um to be expended on that is 483,269.

We came to you this year for um track restriping and turf curbing repairs at on the um out at the track and field.

That was 27,495.

you've approved um a project for the DCS building automation that was failing that was that's up to 55,000.

The uh high school the varial flow pump replacements you guys had approved 30,000 for that.

The FHS tennis court tennis court design services was the most recent um project at 41,500 that was approved. Um, and then one of the things as part of that life safety shift around that we had done, normally we have about 481,000 that rolls through the local budget.

And last year during that time, we opted to move some of the life safety projects we were proposing into that slot in the local budget. And then we ended up pushing out the capital projects into reserves. Um, and because some of them were roofs, replacing sections of roofs, those ca those those can only be done in the summer. And so because we didn't know enough at the time to in in order to have the proper planning, those projects were delayed. So ultimately all that was really expended was $81,000 or anticipated out of the capital projects that were scheduled. And then lastly is the facility study um of a h 100,000 that you voted on at the last meeting.

So if we're not proposing any increase to that as you can see because there was a significant amount pushed in last year um based upon the life safety proposals um and the capital projects that got moved into this group. So we're anticipating to have about 1.3 million which we feel is comfortable and we don't feel that we need to appropriate any undesated into the capital projects account this year.

I'll now move on to the tennis courts.

Um so the tennis courts, we've been saving for the tennis courts um for several years now because they've been talked about since I when I was here before we were talking about them when I left in 2016 and we were still talking about them when I got back in 2023.

Um and so but in the meantime, you established a reserve account to start putting money away to replace the tennis courts. did something.

You did something. Perfect. Um so there's at the end of this year there'll be $190,000 that has been put aside for the tennis courts. Um with some recent very rough draft of um estimates for tennis court replacements.

Um, and what we've done is we're requesting to add $510,000 to the tennis court reserves, which will make the balance about 700,000.

This actually would cover the cost of replacing the courts as they exist. So that is three quarts asphalt.

That's um the estimates. It's about 681,000 right now. We still need to do the the testing the c the core borings for the material under the the tennis court. So it's like a very rough number but we were asking for a number so that we could use it for budgetary purposes.

Um there are there are discussions about asphalt post tension. There's discussions about three courts four quarts. What we felt was prudent was to at least budget for what we have which is three courts asphalt. So just a reminder that are not playable now.

Yes. And so, um, Superintendent Gray wants to remind us all that the courts have been deemed unsafe to play on. And so, we are searching for alternative alternatives right now for our students for the spring season for tennis um so that they can still continue to play practice and um host matches hopefully on another turf um on another court. I call it turf, but it's a court. Um, so that's the recommendation for the tennis court. Um, I and and when I talk about the other options, one of the other thoughts, there's potentially grant funding that's being sought, there's potentially some fundraising that may happen. And then depending upon what the when the when the prices come back and what the board decides to go through, we can remind I can remind you all that we have that capital reserve account as well, that 1.3 million that we might be able to tap into if it goes above if we're above the 700,000. We would use a combination of funding potentially.

That's a a few a month or so out. So, I just wanted to know let you know we're preparing for it. We're proposing to use 510 um to to get where we would need to be.

Um I'll move on to the track and field reserve. Um that was also established while I was gone because the track and field came in and started being used. So annually we put about $35,000 into that.

Um at the end of the 2526 year, there'll be $280,000. We're asking to continue that contribution of 35,000 a year to continue to build for an ultimate replacement of the track at some point.

Um, so that that would leave a balance of about 315,000 and then a heating fuel reserve of a 100,000 that was established when I first got here probably 2011 2012. Um, and we have not, we'll knock on some wood, we've never had to use it. And what this the heating reserve is really set for is typically we're looking at historical data. We're getting pricing. We're putting stuff into the budget.

Nobody expects gas to be $4 a gallon almost right now, right? That affects us as well for heating. So the reserve was set up years ago in order to give us a cushion for those types that type of expense. So, while we haven't had to use it and it currently holds 100,000 in it, who knows? We might have to use it fairly soon if if um prices continue to rise because we are still heating. So, um so with if you add all the columns in the facilities reserve, that's the capital projects, the tennis court, the track and field, and the heating, that brings us to 2.4, a little over 2.4 million.

Um, and I'll I'm just going to try not to scroll up quickly, but I'll just bring you back to the top in the italicized words there, the reserve account funding. So, we're we're proposing to appropriate $885,000 from undesated fund balance this year to um to to put into these article N or facility reserves.

This is my first year. So, uh I'm gonna go back to some pretty rudimentary questions. Um undesated fund balance is whatever we've collected that we could not spend.

Yes. So, so our revenue sources and I'll I'll I'll just slide up because I'm in the in the budget document itself, right? So, um, and I'll just kind of to start at the top, your expenses are at the top, right? So, this year's 2627, we're proposing 47 million. That's the total year-over-year budget. We then subtract sub start subtracting revenues out. Um, so the first line there is shared revenues, and this is where you usually see the largest flux. Um, we're we're budgeting 1.4 4 million in um shared revenues, which means we're keeping that out of taxation because we're expecting this revenue. So, if we slide down a little bit to the bottom of that sheet, and I'll try and make it a little bigger for y'all, um the shared revenues that we're we're budgeting for are um we maintain the Hunter Road Fields for the town of Freeport and they pay us to do that.

that is a contractual agreement that we have. Um we are in I believe this is year this will be 2627 will be year three of a 5-year agreement.

Um we had historically budgeted an expense for a shared employee with the town of Freightport which would be a like a custodial type grounds position and then we put this offsetting revenue in. It's never come to fruition.

It was there be when I left in 2016. It was back in 23. We've never filled it. I took it out of the expenses and I've taken it out of the revenue. We're not we we've never done anything with it with it. So, I don't want to continue to show it. Um state agency client um SLMed. That's for students that are under the care of the state who we are providing services for that we can actually bill. Um the office of instructional support does that billing. Um and so that's a number based on an average that but however when we bill it's based on actual students. So if a student moves in a student moves out it's an it again which is why I typically try to do it based on an average.

Um the next line is interest. So obviously we have undesated fund balance which sits in a bank um and we earn interest on it. So um that is a revenue that the district receives. So we offset taxation with it. Again this has been one of those it's one of the lines that overperforms uh that had been overperforming and I crept it up over the past couple of years but I was hesitant to move it this year um based upon everything going on.

So I did I did leave it flat and felt comfortable with that. Um so as you know um community programs has a laugh and learn program and which they actually charge um parents for or they get funding from um DHS for particular students. They do do utilize space within our buildings and because they charge for it, we ask them to help cover some of the cost of the space that they're in. So, um, you'll see that $15,000 is there. That's they're in the same amount of spaces as they were last year. Um, and so we've kept that flat.

The thing that changed this year, as you know, um, we are we will we are pro we are currently providing to some of the um, children under CDS um, some of the the four-year-olds. We are providing services to them through our early intervention team. We have an agreement with CDS that we can bill for that. But now that we're going to become part of cohort three, they're our responsibility. We assume FAPE they're ours. So the funding for that is going to be coming into the CDS fund which is going to be a separate fund than the local budget which is fund 2213. Not that you all care, but um so while we see a negative here, as we talked about earlier, those staff members are also going to move out. Um so um then then we go on to um we call it the aspirations account. Really, this is taking money from undesated.

It's largely in then we put it a line within the superintendent's budget for $8,600.

This this is typically used when um a team makes nationals or a team makes states, you know what I mean? And there's some overnight expense or it's a doesn't happen every year. Sometime, you know, this is the pot of money if they ask the super they've done their fundraising, they haven't met their goal, is there something that the superintendent could offer and the district could support with. That's what this $8,600 typically covers. Um most times it's OMY of the bind um that end up um going and then the ultimate undesated fund balance. So this is the amount of undesated fund balance that we typically use each year to help offset taxation.

Uh prior to the implementation of the vehicle and equipment replacement plan and the energy audit projects, we were running about 900,000 in this line.

Um and what that means is is we're taking money, we'll just be playing with it, right? We're taking money that has been taxed previously or collected previously. We are then appropriating it and subtracting it out of the expenditures so we're not taxing for that same money again.

Um, we've increased it slightly because part of the part of the presentation for taking on the expenditures for the energy audit and for the vehicle and equipment replacement plan, we wanted to try to levelize what was entering the budget annually to incrementally take that on over a 4-year period. So, what you see here, anything above the 900,000 is what we're using to help implement that plan.

Um and so those shared revenues of the 1.4 million if we collect Valerie 300,000 in in um you know interest that's something more than what we budgeted for that would ultimately end up in undesated because it's we've overcolcted for that. Um the other other way that undesated fund balance gets increased is at the end of the year when when you like settle it all out. What does our budget look like? We budgeted a certain amount. We spent a certain amount. If there's anything left that um lapses into undesated fund balance and again um I will get on my soap box which I've gotten on for 16 years now.

And I strongly feel that undesated fund balance should be utilized for one-time type expenditures and not for expenditures that annually run through your budget because if you spend it and you don't replenish it, it's an automatic cliff, right? So if we spent all $44 million, didn't collect any extra, right, I would not be increasing undesated fund balance at all at the end of this year. I would remain flat, but I would be spending that $1 million because I've used that to offset taxation, right? So that's not really a revenue that I give myself. What I say what I what I'm saying is is if I need to spend all 44 million, I'm going to pull out of my savings account a million dollars, right? Because it gets spent and it reduces it. And if you continually do that to save positions or to pay your electric bill or those types of things which are annual expenditures, eventually you will run out of money.

And then your budget may not go up, but you now don't have a million dollars to use. So you automatically have to tax people a million dollars more than you had in the previous year.

That's why I get on the soap box for onetime expenditures. Um, sorry.

Okay. I feel weird acknowledging.

Uh so an example of what would go into that would be like we have what was it five or six open special ed tech positions.

We've budgeted for those salaries but we have not paid those salaries. Correct. Right. Correct.

So that would then go into that undesated fund balance. Is that right?

At the end of the year. Yes. It it would ultimately add to it as long as we didn't overexpend somewhere else.

Right. So it was however many much 300,000. Right. Right. Next year would be 1.3 roughly.

Well, we wouldn't necessarily increase this number that we're using for the budget because again, you don't want to create the cliff. What it would do would it would allow the undesated fund balance to grow that you could potentially use for these one-time expenditures that we're trying to use it for. Tennis courts, right? We're going to do it once every 25 years. So, you know, that's it's it's really that way of trying to So, if I if so, let's just use the example if we didn't have the reserve account for the tennis courts and we needed to come up with $700,000.

If I push it into the local budget, that's $700,000 that then gets pushed to the local taxpayers through the formula.

And then next year, we're done the tennis court. So, that 700,000 is not in there.

Right? So your rates go like this. And so for me, it's a method to utilize the reserve accounts, set those up so that we don't have to tax people for any unnecessary expenditures because typically what we were doing before that we would put an amount of contingency in in the event that something shows up. We had money to go to. It was called contingency. It was a line item within the budget. That is now gone. And we have these article reserves sitting on outside the budget at the annual budget meeting each year. We go through an article that says we want to put this money in and we want to be able to spend from it. And then we come to you as at the board level and say this need has arisen. We have the money here. Can we have the permission to spend from it?

Um sorry continuing on that. So, just so I can wrap my head around this because this is very out of my wheelhouse, but if we were to, let's say, all of a sudden, fill, you know, $300,000 worth of those positions for next year. Um, would then the following year we would then have at that line 700,000 or is that not right?

That line.

So, okay. So um I'm trying to No, in the shared revenue using of the undesated fund.

Yes. So no the un like as I mentioned before we try to use a stable amount in the in the revenue side and the reason for the stable amount is usually we're trying to land somewhere around our true unexpended items annually.

Um because I think part of it is I mean it's a variety of things like those positions are one thing that feeds it.

There's the other thing like any open position we assume somebody's coming in at a certain point in the scale and we make assumptions about their insurance and you know some people may come in higher some may come in lower um they may take single they might not take family like so there's there's a variety of things because what what's different about us than say any other business is we can't go negative right like we cannot go below you know we cannot spend more than we say we're going to spend at that annual budget meeting So, we have to make assumptions in there so we don't put ourselves in a situation where we get even close, right? Um, we want it's this fine line between we don't want to tax and collect too much. We don't want to take more than we need, but we need to take enough to cover those question marks through through the budgeting process. And because there's so many different things that sort of play into that pool, they tend to even out to roughly the same amount each year. So it might be this year the positions don't get filled but next year it's because insurance was less but like they tend to even out. Is that fair?

And and we don't say okay I know there was five unfunded positions so I'm automatically going to increase that amount because again if the higher you raise it the harder it is to make up. So if we were to truly spend that money, I mean, we saw what a turnkey budget looked like this year for just salary and benefits. So without the point is is that while it sounds like a viable solution to buy down a tax rate for one year, that's all you're doing is buying down a tax rate for one year or saving positions for one year. next year you're going to have to figure out how you're going to have to fund that because you're already starting behind if you don't replenish what you're utilizing.

And that's why I say that million dollars that you kind of see on that bottom line, that's kind of the where I've seen the target of where we've been landing um at the end of at least the past three years that I've been back.

So without if we hadn't had this cushion and we'd had that I think it was a septic failure at panel we would do what? We would have had to send out have a vote. What what would it have?

Yes. So so if we didn't have reserves that we could that we were authorized to access. Yeah. we would have to have an emergency town meeting to essentially give us either the ability to this is this sort of came up with the tennis courts, right? When we wanted to to start the design work, we weren't author we had the savings, we called it tennis courts, but we weren't allowed to use it because we didn't ask. So, there's two things. One, it could be that we have it, we're not authorized, in which case we have to have a meeting to ask permission. And if we had no reserves and we had a failure and we needed to to basically have a gosh, I don't even know what that would look like. Like, can we do like an interim billing to the towns if we had a town meeting that said we needed to collect another 500,000?

You could do an assessment, but I don't know how they're going to do it if their tax bills have already been sent out. Right. Right.

Which is why we don't want to get into that situation.

Correct. and the cost of doing an annual budget meeting and then invalid budget validation referendum in you know because you have to do a mini budget process right in the middle of this is also more cost effective because we're not doing all of the wheels that it takes correct and although they're designated into account they're still sitting in an interestbearing account making us the interest um they're just assigned somewhere so that you guys have access to them um with the correct vote Can I ask maybe we don't know yet because I know the audit isn't complete.

Um what is the undesated or what do we expect the undesated fund balance to be after we assume we making these uh designations?

It's like I thought you were gonna ask she knew I was gonna ask question. It's weird. Kelly's in my brain.

So um so yes um the actual while the audit hasn't been finalized there is a preliminary audit that I've been reviewing um and I agree with the number so I'm putting it up here. Um so the estimated undesated fund balance um is 4 million 10 10,71.

Um, we're proposing to, um, use 1,ion28. That's the number we just looked at, plus the $8,600.

Um, that that would be an an assigned use. Um, and then article two, replenishing 200. Article 6, 140. We're not giving anything to reserve this year because of the large influx last year.

We're adding five, proposing to add 510 to the tennis court and 35 to track and field. Here's the number that I was kind of talking about, the annual number.

This is where I'm kind of expecting it to land. Um, again, just an estimate because we're still um we haven't, you know, done our spring ordering um for, you know, like the final semester of the year. So, um my best guess um of 16 years of experience is looking right around here. um which would leave us w what we would consider uncommitted because once you say we want to spend it on article you know we want to put it over in two they're considered committed at that point. So um where we would be looking to land is about $3 million which represents 6.76% of the 2526 citizen adopted budget.

There is a state statute regarding how much undesated fund balance you can have. Currently that sits at 9% um and it's if anybody wants to look it up it's MRS title 20A section 15689B6.

Um and yeah so uh well I had to look it up and I thought I would share it because I did.

Um so so we're allowed to have according to state statute 4 million right around $4 million. Um historically the number had been at 5% which is why I'm showing you that um during the co if you all remember during COVID we got a lot of um COVID relief funds um and so for several years and we had all done our budgets at that point and then we all got the influx of money um and so especially during that COVID year when students weren't in our building there was remote learning going on there that expenses weren't as A lot of districts were pushing higher than the allowable number and so the legislature allowed for the 9%.

That was supposed to expire in this year 25 26 but it has been extended. So I'm showing you both numbers because I'm trying to stay somewhere within the target so that if it goes down to 5% we're still relatively close. Now, I will say nobody's policing it at this point, but it is in the um funding statute as part of your subsidy calculation that if you were over that, they could potentially withhold subsidy in in any amount over that. So, um it's mixed. Right now, we're sitting at 7.7 6.76 with the recommendations that I'm making to you tonight.

Yeah. And that number, I mean, when I first got on the board, that statute was 3%. And nobody lived within it because that felt extremely tight for districts.

I mean, think about a 40 $45 million a $45 million budget with a million2 allowed in your savings account. Like, that's not a lot. I mean, you know, that's that's a that's a septic in a roof and the world ends, right? Um so you know going up to nine they sort of settle back to five but back up to nine.

So um and just a reminder that the ones that we have sitting in capital in article 2 in article one in tennis courts those don't count towards those percentages because those are considered designated.

So as long as we say what we're going to do with them we can have as much as we want.

Yes. Not that we want to collect more than we need because this is taxpayer money. Um but we can have a a a safe amount um rainy day. So other questions for Kelly.

Okay. Thank you.

Okay, that was everything for show and tell, right? That was show and tell.

Okay. Uh so now we we get to the uh deliberations piece for the board. Um thank you for the additional information. um for the recommendations.

Um I guess I will I will put it out to the board of of what's your pleasure in terms of uh where you want to start because I'll just remind folks the goal um the goal is that we adopt a budget two meetings from now. Uh and in a perfect world at the next meeting which is a week from today, we have one on the 18th. Um, we would come to essentially the number we're comfortable with. Um, so, you know, if if folks have additional questions around what's being recommended about um, you know, we do still have our administrative staff here, so if there were additional questions for them, um, now is your opportunity to ask those.

Chris, you had mentioned that you were gonna talk about um like the potential for between seven and 8%.

We've talked about that as an administrative team. Uh a couple of meetings ago, I responded off I gave a response off the cuff, but it was not really discussed with the team at that time. So, it since then, we've had the opportunity to do that. And the short answer is that if you wanted to get somewhere between the seven and 8% um what I would recommend adding back in order of what helps kids the most is first is the instructional stratus just position that is in tier two and then second would be something that's not necessarily evident when you look at what's in the tiers at first. It would be to make that 6 Spanish teacher at Freeport Middle School a 1.0 so that we can really maximize the degree to which those kids are getting world language.

And Pam could talk more about this than I can, but that would mean that we could ensure that um all seventh and eighth graders get world language.

So that would expand it from just eth to seventh and eth.

Correct. And then the third uh adback would be two general ed edte and mass landing and and that would basically be what gets you between the two tiers.

One at each.

I think there's only pull we're only pulling one from each. So it would we wouldn't Yeah.

What is the number between those two tiers with of those?

Yeah. because I I feel like we're we're saying between seven and eight, but really seven is 6.5, right? According to here. So maybe maybe understanding, you know, what the Yeah. the impact of So I can Kelly can I'm I can get Kelly to be more exact with this probably, but I can eyeball it for you. So the instructional strategist, the rough cost of a teaching position is $105,000.

And then with the Freeport Middle School Spanish position, the current uh the way that's currently structured is that it's a point6 teaching position, point4 edtech position.

Um we feel that the point4 edtech duties could be absorbed. So really we'd be adding and an edtech is basically half the cost of a teacher.

So we'd be adding in point4 of a teacher but losing point4 of an edtech. So we're really adding point2 of a teacher to make that teacher whole. So $21,000. Yes.

And then each of the two elementary eds is about half of $105,000. So 525.

So another 105.

What I don't know uh which we haven't just haven't had time to work out yet is just in terms of this long range projection what that does.

So off the cuff math 105,000 out of 47 million is 22%.

So it's a call it a quarter of a percent per full educator full-time teacher roughly. Okay. Yep. Gotcha.

So that gets us to about that gets us roughly to that 7% 7.1 7 Yeah. And this recommendation doesn't get you exactly halfway between seven and 8%. It's closer to the seven. Um that's what we would recommend adding that. So just just so I'm clear the edte or more street and mass landing even because presumably the the idea well in my mind I guess I'll preface this with how I look at this conversation around these sort of what you would add back first um to avoid the alleart version um is you know if the board feels like we could support something a bit higher than 6.53 we would be looking to add back the instructional strategists if we felt like we could go a bit higher than that we would add back the we would increase the Spanish and then so we would do them sort of down the line that's how I would get you there great um so then my question is between two and so we wouldn't get to three unless we had done two um and my I'm just asking the question around um and maybe I should look at this to confirm my thinking before I say it um the edteexs at Freeport Middle are dropping from from what in the proposal the current proposal and then we would be losing another point4 essentially.

That's right.

But you you're the recommendation would be to add back at the other schools not to keep one of the ones at the middle school.

That's right. And we talked about this extensively the other day in our admin team meeting. And the strong sense from the school administration is that they will be okay without those positions. Um and that the positions have greater impact in the lower grades.

Okay.

Lois So, I hope this is okay to ask. You'll tell me if it's not. I've read the contracts now, both the edtech one and or the one for support staff.

Support staff. Yeah. And for the what I call teachers, but you call educators.

So, it's just semantics. But, um I can't find anywhere what the increase is from this year's salaries to next year. I know that the the support staff is being negotiated right now, but I don't know what the increase is. You keep referring to but we have contractual obligations and I can't imagine, but I may be wrong that the contractual obligation is 6 and a half% increase next year. Can you tell me what it is?

It's about that. Kelly, can you help me on for the educators? For the educator contract. For the educator contract next year. Yeah, it's six and a half.

Yeah. Well, yeah, because so contractually in the agreement it says 5.5, but there are steps associated with that. So, it's more than the 5.5 when you add steps, right? So, it gets total wages, the total wages for an individual, but the increase is a 5.5% increase for someone. That was a contractual agreement for someone at the top of the scale.

The scale grew by 5.5% per line. Yes. Good. Thanks. For year over year. Yes.

And I did kind of push the numbers and it brings us to 7.05 for year.

One, two, and three for um what the superintendent just recommended. If we were to add them back, that's for the two edte, the coach, and making Spanish full-time.

Um yes the strategist sorry so um I am interested to hear uh why that was the first um why that was the first suggested um add back from the tiers or eliminating that that cut um yeah I stop my question there when we discussed it as a team. What the strong feeling was is that the instructional strategists are having a multiplied effect and that they're really working very closely with the administration to help teachers improve their practice and that that is showing up in student data. And so the impact we're getting from having those people is very strong.

And so right now we have five strategists. The recommendation the initial recommendation was to go to four. Um so it's not it's not necessarily as easy as one per building. Do they they split the the original recommendation was to go to two at the elementary level.

Okay. So, so FMS and FHS had no change and then the other ones essentially.

So, we we currently have one at the high school and if I messed this up, somebody raise a hand. Will, I'm looking at you. I was say it's right here.

Okay, gotcha. Yeah. Yeah.

So, right now we have one at the high school, 6 at the middle school, and those two are recommended not to change. Yes.

Durham has 1.4. 4 recommended to go to 1.06. I don't know how you figure that out. And then um and then the elementary schools two and those each two individuals and each dropping to 67. Yes.

Okay.

You figure it out because Durham's a K8 school and one strategist is middle school 68. So 6.4.

Oh, I see. Got it.

Okay. So one person splits their time between Freeport Middle and Durham for the high school for the middle school.

Y okay.

So it's really the the multi the amplified effect of one position across multiple schools and and grade levels.

Okay.

Um, sorry Lois, I didn't mean to preempt you.

Can I ask what your fourth choice would be? Is there another one? I have not gone that far with the team, so I hesitate to go out on a limb with that. Yes.

Um, I could talk I could come back to you at the next meeting.

I would like that. I mean, if we're not going to make a decision tonight, if we're going to make a decision tonight, then I'll have to make a decision tonight and decide how to vote. But, right, we don't tonight's not the decision tonight. Um, I would like that. Okay. May I say why?

Of course. Jinx, you owe me a Coke. I don't drink.

I'm very concerned about that math position. The high school math position.

Yes, I am. And I know we've had this conversation, but I just want everyone to know that I am very concerned about putting out a ma getting rid of a math position. Um, especially when I heard that that particular person is the person who does all the what I call I think it's coding, but what the computer stuff that I don't know about, but you know what?

Somebody who's 17 does. And so I think it's really important that we look at what the impact on the long term is by getting rid of a math position. My opinion.

Yeah. I I guess um since Jen's here, I would be interested in either from you or from Jen. Um I I can I can certainly see the perspective around our concerns about scores etc. Um I also see you know the the point in time where that position was added relative to where we are now from a population standpoint. Um you know those are sort of on opposite sides of the scale. Um, but I I I found our last speaker this interesting this evening very interesting around like are we perpetuating a shrinking uh population by what we're by what we're contemplating. Um I I I don't think it's quite that simple, but you know, it's an interesting it's an interesting concept to think about. Um, and you know, when when we say that we're concerned about math scores, um, and then this is the proposal, um, I'm interested to hear how how in my brain I can, um, reconcile those two things.

Good evening, everybody. Jen Gula from the high school. Um, I also have this cough I can't get rid of, so my voice goes down. Feel like that's every time I'm at this microphone. Um, I think one of the things that I want to make sure um that I'm re reiterating that Superintendent Gray said is that um this our decisions that we're making about the budget aren't about an individual teacher's strengths. Um, it's about or or their impact on our school.

It's about looking at what's in front of us and managing what is in front of us and and and what's responsible. Um I think that in the past I have come to this board when we have felt that class sizes are too big and I over the time that I have been the principal here I've asked for multiple positions that we needed when we found that um we didn't think that our class sizes were manageable or other reasons why we were asking for an increase in staff. Um when we look at class sizes across the district, that's one of the things that we always have to consider. Um all of our work that we think about in math is K through 12 and that includes staffing that we're thinking about at the schools and and where the needs are. Um and all of us have the goal of connect making connections with kids and building their skills. And so I think we're thinking about that across all schools, not just one at the high school. And certainly our math scores are things that we are consistently working on. We're really excited about the work that the K through 12 math committee who's meeting right now is working on and thinking about uh that uh the results that we want for our graduates of high school.

We start those conversations in prek and kindergarten and math and think about what we're doing all the way up and that those may mean potential changes that we're making at all those different levels. And so when we think about class size, it's certainly one factor that we're always looking at. But when we're thinking about improving scores, our teachers at the high school, I've had the opportunity to meet with all of the teachers six through eight when we had our February early release day. And I've met uh with a number of teachers in the K through2 math committee, everybody is working on this and thinking about how do we make the best experience for kids.

And so when we're looking at class sizes at the high school specifically, these are the numbers that I shared a few weeks ago.

The average size class in our algebra 1 right now is 14.8.

Average size in our geometry classes is 16.6.

Um, in the honors level of those two classes, the average size for algebra 1 honors is 12.5.

Uh the geometry honors is larger 19.5. Algebra 2 the average size is 15.4.

Honors is 15.3.

Honors pre-calculus is a larger class size. That's an average of 22.

However, calculus is an average size of 14. And um computer programming is a class size of 11.5.

And when we are looking comparatively just at a few of our other classes, our average size in ELA 9 is 18.25.

In chemistry, it's 17.5.

In American history is 20.8 and foundations of art which is predominantly nth graders who are um uh beginning with their visual art is 18.25.

So on the whole right now our math classes as a department have the smallest averages across the entire department. There's other classes at school that might have very small numbers. I explained this before.

Something like AP music theory. It's one of our smallest classes, also one of our most challenging classes in this building. And that's a very niche study.

And we're fortunate to be able to to offer that class. that teacher also runs the band and has 60 kids in band. And so that's where we're looking at and those numbers don't always um appear as even as they seem across the board. We asked for an increase in our math teachers a few years ago and our populations have gone down even with the there's always an impact to us with the reduction of the of a math teacher. these class sizes and the um the the decrease in the total number of students at the high school.

These class sizes will increase but not to a point that we feel that we I would come to the board and say our class sizes are too large. Even with the reduction of a teacher, these class sizes may not get to where American history is at 20.8.

Um, and so those are some of the things that we are looking at. We are certainly always trying to improve achievement in math and I think we are are working on that so hard. All these teachers that I'm seeing seeing do exceptional work and thinking about how to enhance their instruction in math and it's not just dependent on class sizes.

Thank you for that uh Malik. Um yeah, thank you for that explanation.

That's really helpful. Um I'm curious about the we heard about um computer programming and some STEM offerings and will those offerings be affected by a reduction of one the one full-time teacher or will those offerings still be available? So specifically computer programming, there is no other there's no teacher in the math department who teaches a STEM course other than computer programming. Computer programming used to be a part of the science department and then we shifted it um two years ago to be a part of the math department. And so that what we do every year is we um adjust teachers schedules and we base that on teacher strength and student need. So we look at that. So it might be that a teacher's teaching geometry one year and then the next year they're teaching uh pre-calculus. they might it's maybe not a surprise that it can be very challenging to actually teach pre-alggebra more so than honors uh honors pre-calculus or calculus and so in some years we've rotated who is teaching pre-alggebra um and so we are just for those of you who have a middle school student we are just right now in registration process so we haven't determined teaching assignments yet and so we look at the number of course signups Um, as I said, there's a um a average class size of 11.5 in those classes right now. And so we'll look at what um the signups are and then determine um who is able to teach that class and how we would provide that.

And if for instance, and this is just a what if the honors calculus, the AP honors calculus were to reduce to I don't know, six next year, six kids sign up for it. Is that the person that then is that I know it's it's not the person that's rifted, but is it does that class go away because there are only six kids or or are there other opportunities that you provide online at Bowden, whatever, for someone who's so gifted in math that they're that they don't need pre-calculus. They can be in honors calculus, god forbid. I can't even imagine.

And we have some awesome mathematicians in this school. We do have some ninth and tth graders who are in our AP classes, which we'll have to do that already. Whether we offer that or not, we are um incredibly fortunate to have so many different opportunities for students to access early college classes. Some of those are for dual enrollment credit. Um we also um part of my budget lines each year is to make sure that we have some funding for online classes for classes that we can't offer and that a student has gone above and beyond. So that is something that we've been able to offer since I started at Freeport. We've had students do um linear algebra and differential equations. If you're ever looking for something super fun on a weekend to look at, check those two courses out. And they've done them through online at MIT.

they've done them through USM, through Bowden College, but when we have a course that only gets down to six, um we do our very best to still offer that.

So, right now, AP Calculus BC, which is the second level of AP. So, that is the in the building. That's the highest math class that we offer. It depends each year on how many students are ready for that level. This year, it's very small.

So, right now, that class is at five.

whereas our class um that's just before that that's the prerequisite to it AP calculus AB that's a larger class so it depends on the cohort that comes through and what their readiness is but I don't anticipate us having to eliminate a course you know this is an area I'm struggling with as well my initial question has been you know if if we are um having concerns about scores, how is this going to help um scores and student uh experience in in this subject? And I know that's not really how we're looking at this year's budget, that none of these reductions are really intended to help the students. It's really more what what is the least impact. And that's helpful to kind of reframe.

Um, at the same time, I'm still struggling with how uh that this is an area that is already impacted.

And so, how is how is this a an area that has the least impact? I know you just walked through the class sizes compared to the other class sizes. It does seem that to me that math is one subject that would really benefit from those smaller classes with the individualized teaching that can really be required. And I I know that all of the subjects would the teachers would prefer to have smaller classes with more individualized teaching. Um I'm I'm just I'm I don't know if I have a particular question other than I guess I do want to better understand how we'll will help to reduce help to increase the the scores and and the student experience in math with with without that teacher. So I think that um what I had shared before is that this work on the curriculum that the teachers are consistently doing that we're doing we've been doing that for years at the high school where they're looking at assessments together. They're looking at like what's the most powerful type of learning that we can provide for students in class in math which has changed very much in the last decade of how how kids think about math how they are doing math by hand um technology all sorts of things. So I think that curriculum work is really powerful and collaborating with the grades levels um that that precede the high school. I think that that work also is what we're really focused on. How do we um take that uh and and make sure that our students are achieving at higher levels.

In addition to that, at the high school, um, we have now had this, um, I'd have to look back, but I would say at least five years. And this was based on our our precoid math committee that we have a class that's called math support. So that's a half block class. Um, it's very small sections. I think the largest we've had is 11 students in that section. And so that's an additional 40 minutes of math that students in algebra 1 or geometry who are struggling take in addition to their math class. We had it for algebra 2. We didn't have as high of a number of students who were enrolled in that. And so that's led by a math teacher. And so the way that at the high school that we have a 75 minute block and then we cut them in half. The intervention blocks are cut in half. So that teacher will see um you know fewer than 10 in the first half, fewer than 10 in the second half. And what we have also added this year that I spoke about earlier in the year is what we call falcon lab. So that's any student who's struggling in any class we've we've set the threshold of a 76 or below in any class is then shifted into one of these intervention blocks where they can focus on any of their classes. But we it's with either a math teacher, social studies teacher, science teacher, or ELA teacher. And we try to prioritize the class that they're struggling the most.

So then they are in that class. They could potentially be in their algebra 1 class plus in a math support class and what we call a falcon lab. So they would have 75 minutes of of math instruction with their class and then they'd have 75 minutes of support in some way, shape or form. Looks different um for each student how they're accessing that and utilizing that. We use those as interventions. Then we also have our advisory system which our advisory system is academically focused where we use our call back system where teachers can reserve kids and call them back. So those are all of the different ways that all of our teachers including the math teachers are using to help enhance uh skills and understanding for the kids who are struggling. Um so that that's some of the ways that we will still do that while we regardless of what the class size is. I don't anticipate with the numbers overall numbers of our school going down and the projected enrollment goes down for the next three years that uh that these sizes I I do not predict that they are going to drastically increase. They're going to increase but not drastically so.

So, you say projected enrollment is going to go down the next three years, but and maybe I just don't have these numbers in front of me. When I do the quick math on how many eighth graders we have, our average is 147 where our current average at the high school is 138 per cohort and then after that you have a slight drop and then you have 157 and then you have 156 and it seems to me like our projected numbers are actually going up not down.

So on the projected number on the projected enrollment scale right now we're at 570. I was looking at the totals. So when you look at the totals for the high school um then uh we are at 570 right now which our highest since I have been here was at 645. We're at 570.

It's projected to go to 555 and then down to 543 and then come back up to 555. Those are the numbers that were the last time that I looked at the projected enrollment. I didn't look at it this week, but those are the numbers that we see because um in some years we've had these bubble classes of 160 um high 150s that when you look at the chart that is not what's predicted to be coming to us right now.

So from what I can kind of see here is it it looks like that's not predicted to come to us in the next call it two or three years but it is predicted to come to us in the next five years because we have in our current sixth grade we have 157 our current fifth grade we have 156.

So like those are big classes big cohorts for for that. So in three years we might not but in five years we might.

And I guess one of my this is more of a statement. Um, one of my worries is that we we are firing and hiring and firing and hiring and especially like you mentioned the the Jack's comment, the student we had, he mentioned stability.

Um, and I think that not only is that stability for our kind of tax base, but it's also stability for the teachers we hire. And that that's important to kind of project as a board. And so one of my worries is okay so for the next two years we decided we have we have small class sizes but then we're going to have to hire again in four years right yeah I think I I think you're right um you know so then it becomes like what's your time horizon that we want to carry you know it it's hard to it's hard to judge um and and I will say um and maybe maybe this isn't true it's something that floats around in my head.

I also think that it's not a onetoone move from the middle the high school is where most people are regardless of kind of why like people will switch at high school. They may go through their local schools and then choose to go to a private school. Um, so you know, I don't think if we went back to, you know, some of the smaller classes and looked at them at in the fifth grade, would it would have been the same number of kids, you know, so I don't know if there's a normal number that we sort of expect to divert off to to to a different high school or not. I don't maybe someone knows the answer to that but um but yeah I mean it's you know we certainly don't want to and I I totally understand your point Chris like if we knew that you know next year would be an unusually small year but there you know it was coming right back up the next year I would 100% agree with you but you know two to three years and then you know everything gets fuzzier the farther you go out into the future right the ability to predict goes way down um so you know I would be hesitant to say that I wanted to necessarily keep the status quo because five years from now we might need it. That's what I do with my closet. It never works well. Like I keep things way too long. Um I think along those lines like when we got to 645 students, I was prepping to come to the board and say this building was made in the renovation to add another floor and we're getting close. You know, we were pressed for advisory. everyone was sharing a room. That's just not the case right now. Most teachers do not share their room, have their own room for advisory. I we feel the the the impact of the numbers and I think that um we then we are responsive and I have come to the board to say as I did for the math position and said, you know, we're at this point where we feel like we need to increase staffing right now and I think that's what we look at closely every year. I certainly hear, as Michelle said, I I I hear what you're saying. I think that um if we were in this place where we thought 645 was the number where we were staying, that that's a that was a a press on this building and how we were offering all sorts of structures that we had put in place. And now next year it it will be almost a hundred students fewer than that. Yeah, I appreciate that. Thank you.

Weren't they eating lunch like everywhere in the building? Because they used to. It was crazy. Lois, can you tell me in the anticipatory numbers that are for fifth and sixth and seventh and eighth whether or not any of the future growth in apartment buildings, for instance, the one that's going in, I think it's down on depot in Freeport.

There's tons of building that I see in panel um in the last couple years has been a lot. Um Durham, I know we don't encourage building because of whatever for whatever reason. And so the numbers in Durham, it doesn't seem like there's so much building going on, but when you figure the numbers, are you figuring in the numbers of possible families that are going to move in to various new housing?

So yes, I mean, I think we when we meet with the towns, we kind of talk about where their housing starts. Um, where have they been historically? Uh, I think free ports have kind of gone up because of some of that housing. Um but what they have told us and what seems to bear out since some of those um housing um projects have come online is that most of those in Freeport anyway aren't directed towards um families with kids in school. Um they're either like brand new out of you know very young professionals, young families that that aren't in school or young couples that aren't in school yet or they're retired.

um they're not, you know, they're not targeted towards families with little kids. So, we haven't seen a huge increase in that from my understanding.

Um and in Panel and and Durham, um there it what it seems to be happening, certainly more in in Durham. I'm not as familiar in Panel, but um they have been clustering into subdivisions, but really the number of housing starts hasn't really gone up. before they were sort of scattered throughout the town, but the total numbers haven't increased um as much. Um you know, it's one of those things that I think we've always taken a look at. Um we have done enrollment studies in the past.

My personal opinion is they are a complete waste of money because they just make things up. But um because they won't tell you their their strategy on how they come up with their numbers. Um so clearly I don't believe them. But um but we yeah we haven't sorry it's a sidebar. Um yeah I know if you can't show your work I don't believe it. Um but you know we haven't seen sort of the growth in the towns resulting in huge spikes in the schools from my understanding.

Is that true? Yeah.

What I can say is in the projected enrollments that we unrolled when I first presented the budget that are in the slideshow from gosh January 28th, those projected enrollments take into account as best as we can, as well as we can the growth that we would anticipate.

One piece of data that I can collect, I don't have it at my fingertips, but I can certainly get it, is over the past, if it's five years or seven years, how many people uh how many students in the eighth grade have chosen not to come to the high school. We could do that data point. What's hard is that there's so many factors that are in that. A student who moves, who loses housing, who chooses to go to private school, who um parents split and they go to school in a different town. So there's a lot of factors that we would not have. Um so but it's certainly data if that's something that the board wanted. We keep all of those records of who did not um enter the high school, who went to FMS and DCS. The other flip side of that is how many students are transferring in which this fall was incredibly high um more so than usual. And so those are the numbers that we can look at. But again, we don't have how many of those kids were originally RSU5 students and are returning. How many are brand new?

There's some kids who've moved here from Florida. And I was like, I'm very sorry. This is not the winter to do that. But, um, we don't have that context in the numbers, but if that's something that the board was interested in, we keep all of those records.

Other questions? Okay, I want to take something back. I said um um I was I was making a joke about keeping things for five years and this is clearly not something that's you know funny talking about positions. Um and it's just sitting on sitting on me that I said that and it wasn't intentional around positions. As you said, every single one of the positions is important and valuable and I appreciate every single person who works in this district and you probably didn't care to hear that, but it it was just weighing on me and I wanted to say it. So, um, other questions?

Oh, hi.

Hi. Um, I just wanted to piggyback on something Jen said, and I know probably now it it was she made the comment 10 minutes ago, but it it got me thinking um a little bit differently and she she started by talking about math instruction is really 13 years of math instruction. So, we can talk about high school math, but I think we work really hard as a principal and administrative team to think about the instruction kids are getting from age four until when they graduate and thinking about what that picture looks holistically. Um, and it got me thinking about the question about the instructional strategist and why that had come up as something the administrative team decided to prioritize. And Julie's probably gonna give me a look because I'm going to put her on the spot. Um, but the instructional strategist, awesome. I gave her a little forwarding like, "Hey, Julie, I'm going to throw you under the bus." But the instructional strategist in her building has been working particularly hard to think about early math instruction to build the foundation that benefits kids across that span. And I think it will be helpful for you to hear a little bit about what that work looks like, both so we can continue this thinking about math instruction being prek to 12 and also to illustrate a little bit more about the value um and also just like what that role looks like when you're thinking about an instructional strategist.

Yeah, you've heard from me before about like our goals have been math and really trying to improve our math instruction and with an urgency of, you know, we need to not let gaps form um because the bigger they get, the harder it is to fill. And we see that just from children moving through our grades span up to second grade that if they're hitting second grade with those gaps, it's just so much harder for them to maintain and keep up. So the work we've been doing the last two years with our instructional strategist has really been to develop our um math understanding of the development of the early numerousy progression. And so our strategist has led our whole staff through understanding um reasoning at the K2 level. And um and I we just have finished our kind of midyear math assessments and I we have every kindergarten class at 89% or above meeting or exceeding the benchmark at that time. We haven't had that data since I've been the principal there. Um so it just kind of speaks to the impact that the strategist has when providing professional development and working with our teachers and we're working together. Like it's not just individual teachers getting coaching. We're working as teams to really build and deepen our understanding and our strategist is leading that work with with everybody.

Tom joined um one of our staff meetings uh recently where our strategist was running exactly that. So there's a lot of deepening teachers understanding but then practicing the skills together and then bringing those to to classrooms and that is we're just seeing this tremendous impact. So, you know, when we when we came back to the table in terms of what would we add back, we value our strategist so much because of we just see the direct impact they're having both on teacher instruction and then the impact on on learning too.

Thank you. That's it's helpful to sort of zoom out a little bit and look more districtwide, which is why I think we appreciate the feedback of the admin team so much in these discussions.

um to be able to kind of look at it from from that lens staff. Um yeah, I wait I guess I I have like zoom out thoughts and I just wanted to make sure that that was okay with everyone to share at this point. Okay. Um, yeah. So, I feel like part of the pain of a decision like this, it happens when we zoom in and understandably so. Um, and so I don't know if you all have the same thing where after board meetings you just keep thinking about them over and over again. You can't stop. But um in the spirit of trying to help myself stop do that, I um sort of asked I asked myself what do I need to ask or answer to make myself comfortable in supporting the recommended budget. Um and I came up with a list of questions that I thought that I would share. Um so these are the questions that I I'm asking myself. Do we have administrators, teachers, and staff that are experienced, skilled, trustworthy, and dedicated to providing the best we can for our students? I believe the answer is yes to that. Was a budget created with thoughtful, transparent, and collaborative processes involving administrators, teachers, staff, and the board? I believe the answer is yes.

Was a budget created while considering the board's input to the amount it believed the towns and taxpayers could or would bear? Answer is yes. Were appropriate and adequate time and care put into the creation of and the decisions around the budget? I believe the answer is yes.

Was the budget created while thinking of children first? And were decisions made based on how they would affect children and their education.

Also yes. Um is the budget fiscally responsible and sustainable for the district? And does it consider long-term impacts of current year budget decisions? I believe we've been talking about that a lot.

Um, has the impact of any budget cuts been thoroughly investigated through the lens of how it would impact students and the district's ability to manage any associated impact? And that's what we're hearing a lot about tonight.

And have those potentially impacted by budget cuts been treated with kindness and respect? And will these cuts be communicated with transparency and timeliness? I think that continues to happen and has happened so far. Um, has time and space and openness and compassion been provided to and for those who question or disagree with the recommended budget and are we considering those opposing opposing voices and perspectives? I believe the answer is also yes. And then the last one that I considered is would supporting this budget be aligned with my role as a schoolboard member to not operate the schools but to see that they are well operated and to leave the administration of the schools up to the superintendent.

And I think supporting the a tier of the budgets that have been presented to us would also be in alignment with that. So that's been how I've been thinking about it lately and I just wanted to to share with you all and um offer those as potential questions to consider too.

Thank you, Steph. Chris, I feel like I'm the only one with questions, but um can I ask that's usually me. feel free.

Um, this is a question that is is not specifically related to the fiscal year 27 budget, but um is related to the the projected that we talked about. Um, can you give us an update on that process? I know you talked about doing that. I'm not sure if this is an appropriate time for that, but Sure.

Uh, so we just came from a facilities committee just before this at which we presented a draft RFQ to put out to bid um to to call for you know people to do that facility study. Um the facilities committee has not yet chosen to advance it to the board um because we we want to consider it further. Um the language in that draft was specifically aimed very broadly so that it did not give any impression of um predetermining an outcome. Um and that's a very conscious choice. Um there were some members of the public there who great I'm really glad turned up to just participate in that discussion. And so the next steps are to continue to refine that draft of an RFQ. And the intention is to once it clears the the facilities committee to bring it here to the full board so that it can be presented publicly in a fully transparent way and then to put it out to bid. And that process will take a long time. Um, our current estimate is that we wouldn't even get a we wouldn't have the facility study in hand until December of ne of this year.

So that's a long process and in the meantime we are um creating space to just let this idea of change sink in and to listen. I went to the Durham Select Board last night. I have an I'm arranged to go to the pal select board later this month um and to Freeport in early April.

Um I happened to land at the Durham Select Board at a really good night because it was dump night and trash night, dump night. Um Lois and Steph were also there. Um so and gratefully they put me first on the agenda. Um for which I was really really happy. Um, but that meant that there was there were quite a few people there. I mean, there must have been like 50 people there who had lots of questions and I didn't give a I didn't give a presentation. I talked for a little bit about the background of all of this with what we're doing with our budget and the ideas that have been presented about possible long-term stuff. Um, people asked lots of great questions. I would say that lasted what half an hour, 45 minutes, something like that. Um, the trash conversation lasted longer, I bet. Who doesn't like to talk trash for a long time? So, so um, and part of what we have put in the RFQ actually is a communication and community engagement strategy.

So I think you know right now obviously we need to do everything we can to listen and be forward thinking and and seeking out seeking input. But when we get further into the process there is tremendous value in having these kinds of steps originate from outside my office and be moderated and curated in some degree by an objective party.

So the short answer is there have been some very concrete steps recently. Um but this is not a pro like no major decisions are going to happen for a very long time because that's how long it takes to do it right. So I hope that helps.

I also actually want to say um along those lines I want to be really clear about this.

There is obviously one of the problems we have to figure out is what to do with three-year-olds and there was a public comment earlier about ambiguity about the date. So that is understandable ambiguity. The state's mandate for all districts to take on the responsibility is July 2028. But now that we have committed to cohort three, our deadline is now July 2027.

So there's two deadlines, but the one that's for us now is 2027. And my major point though is that yes, we want we need to solve that problem.

And we cannot precondition any facilities reconfiguration decision on needing to solve that problem by a certain time. We have to give that process as much time as it takes. We cannot try to shoehorn a three-year-old solution in you know within we we just can't do that. So I I want to be very very clear that my intention is to point out all the problems we are trying to solve and not to conflate the time.

These are two separate timelines.

We will figure out what to do with three-year-olds no matter what happens with our buildings. We will have a solution. And the solution that was mentioned about using partnering with community providers was discussed at length by the early childhood task force. Um, and there are problems with that solution, but it also has possibilities. So that we don't need to do that for four-year-olds because we already have prek and our prek has the capacity to absorb any new kids that we would have.

three-year-olds is a different matter and we have next year to figure that out. Oh, I appreciate that. Thank you. Yeah.

Um, shifting a little bit. Um, am I correct in my calculations that the budget that we will make for next year, oh, sorry, that we will make next year, so the fiscal year 28 budget is the bud is the budget uh that will be impacted by the new collective bargaining agreement with the um educator tier. Okay.

Has that negotiating process and anticipated um requests from the union been taken into consideration in the estimates we've made in terms of the impacts over the next couple of years?

It has for the support staff contract which we are currently negotiating. Um it's too early to do that for the educator contract for next year. So, I think what Kelly used um to roll it out the years that I think we had two years that we don't have a contract yet. I think she assumed the last year of the contract is what would be the increase for those two years as well.

The last year of the contract. So, it would it would continue on that it would continue on that curve, right? So, we didn't assume it was flat like there was going to be no raise. We just assumed the same raise for next year would be the raise in the following two years.

Right. Yeah. That's super helpful. I guess I guess as I'm just trying to um uh I'm very much this evening finding myself thinking about um that document that I don't have anymore cuz I lost it.

um the uh just uh the scenarios in terms of what the impact will be um the next couple of years on the on the budget as it's anticipated at the I guess it was the 10% and then the seven um yeah that that beautiful that beautiful baby um um and I think I'm just realizing that I'm I'm I'm putting a lot of weight on that um in my thinking about things. Um, you know, as as I was listening to the conversation around the um both when you said that the um you know, what the first three um positions that would be uh added back in um or I guess it would be four positions, sorry. Um that and then the discussion of the math uh position at the high school. Um, you know what my thought just kept going back to was um, yes, but what is the impact on the future years? Um, and um, I don't think that's a wrong thing to be thinking about. I think that's uh, I'm that's why we asked Kelly to to put that together is that we we wanted that information. Um, but I guess I'll just own that I don't know how much I don't know how much to weight that. Um and um and so I guess that doesn't I guess although I guess all I mean to say is that in that that's not I think um I think I think avoiding getting into sort of what we were referring to uh as horse trading in terms of like adding like like uh positions back in at the at the will of the board. Um I guess these questions that we're raising, for example, around the math position, um I guess I just don't know how much really to take into consideration the benefit that we get from a budgetary perspective by not having that $105,000 on average for that position. um and therefore having that not compounding over the years um versus the potential benefit of that. Um, what I don't want to do, and this is to your point about we can't, you know, as as we get further out in time, it gets fuzzier and fuzzier. Um, I guess I just want to be really clear with ourselves, whatever it is that we decide, um, next week. Um, just that we're owning we're owning the estimate of the impact next year. Um, and that we're owning if we if we say yes, go to 7.05. Um and then we run those through that just again knowing that that's not a that's not gospel but just sort of like owning that that's sort of it's at least probably at least that right. Um, and um, I guess I just want to be really clear about that because I think in the conversation about the mass strategist again, all the everything that we're talking about, everything we're saying both in terms of the the concerns about it, but also the the um the rationale for it. Um, I mean, it all it all comes down to me like to okay, if we keep the math strategist, who else do we lose? Like is it the is it the uh the health teacher at the middle school? I think that's really what I meant when I said no if everything's a priority.

No, I know. No, and that's but that's but that's what I mean is that that is sort of to say if we're if we're okay with in both increasing like it's either we're okay with increasing budget and therefore we're increasing the percentage and therefore we're okay with that this year and then we're okay with that for the years to come. Um or um we are asking for another choice to be made. Either one that was that's currently in the 6% to be moved up um or um some poor person that currently isn't um even uh doesn't have this on their radar at all. Um so I guess I don't know. I guess I just wanted to sort of to to articulate that as the way I'm trying to approach this evening and um in just I guess in terms of the math position um I I understand the logic for the proposal. I think the like the the the class sizes totally make sense. Um, I think Jack's well articulated point and others about sort of what the the impact is on um our ability to perhaps um increase scores. Um I think we just got to own that maybe like we're not going to be able to do that.

Like we're just saying like that's like we that's not something we can prioritize right now. um and not uh because I otherwise we say no it is a priority so like get to work math department we're taking away one of your staff members and also you've got a lot of work to do which again I don't know that's not to your point that's not our responsibility really but but like that would kind of be what we'd be saying right if we're um so I don't know I just wanted to sort of put that out as we're thinking about this I think I'll just say for myself I I think the um I'd love to know what the impact of adding those four positions back in. I think for me the um going from the 6 to the one uh 1.0 for Spanish is a is a must. Um because I I'm just not comfortable cutting the language program to that um to the extent where it's only for 8th grade at FMS. Um but I just would really like to know what the the impact of those other choices would be. Um, so basically that colored spreadsheet.

So maybe Kelly could come with that layering in the those this one here. Yeah. So roll the roll forward.

Yeah. And then and just know I mean again and then and then know all right if we're saying 7.05 5 like we're owning that for this year and we're saying that we believe that we can pass that in our um in our district and then also owning whatever the impact of that is next year knowing that um I mean I guess all that we would probably also be saying to ourselves and sort of in advance of the contract negotiations is like okay union you know kind of what we are kind of what we're wanting to hit like this is sort of where we are and if it's going to be over that there's going to be downstream impact of that. Um, which again is not bad. Like that's like we're being perfectly it's we're being perfectly transparent about it. Exactly.

So like I'm I'm f and I'm fine with that. Um, yeah, Steph Colin, I I don't know like I it's hard to know that weight I think of the future, but sometimes when when I've thought about like the future implications, I'm also thinking about what would what additional flexibility might we gain in the future by making a tougher decision now? And so that's just a concept that I'm thinking of as well is like we know we've got a lot of tough stuff coming down the pipeline. And so would making a more difficult decision now that we don't want to make give us more options to consider when we have to make bigger bigger choices or like choices of wanting to like grow or expand opportunities or expand offerings because if we're constantly in this tension of right at the cusp of what we can ask taxpayers for, we're we're not going to be we're not going to have the space to do those things. Um, so that's just my thought.

Yeah. And I just say I think I think that's a really again I think that's a really smart way of thinking about it. I guess I'll just also own that um uh here in public and on the internet that like I don't see any I don't see any way in the next 5 to 10 years that uh this like budget increase is going to be flattening out like like we're not I'm not anticipating we're going to have any like really true flexibility in the next couple of years. we could have more that if we if we again if we're if we make some tough decisions now but just like um just to be clear like I'm expecting it to you know remain around six or seven because of all of the factors that we're talking about. I don't I don't see a way that that would that um at least again in my in my experience historically on the board which is limited um even though I now realize I'm one of the older people on the board.

Well, to Colin's point, uh, to Colin's point, I read a really thrilling news article yesterday in the Portland Press Herald where there's a bill in front of the legislature that would actually reduce free ports funding by quite a bit. So, um, that's also in the back of my mind of potential legislature changes that would not be favorable to our district in particular.

Um, we were in the I think the top 12 schools that would seek cuts. So, in the state or not schools, districts or units um, which I think is really eye opening um, and something that is unfortunately making me feel more toward the seven or whatever. I I don't even know what to call these anymore. Um the uh tier two.

Yeah. Um legacy tier 2.

Um only because as Colin said, like this isn't going to get easier.

It it it's not trending that way. And I think we have to be really eyes wide open about our cuts that we for many of us are painful and horrible. Um but I think potentially necessary if we're losing potentially almost 200,000 with a new model. Um could you share the article? I did not see it. So Oh yeah, I can I'll email it to the group for for those who are uninitiated. the state is considering um a new modifications to the funding formula which are really long overdue. Um but there are new factors that they would consider and one of the most prominent is to consider um income versus just property valuations. And the attempt there is to try to better account for communities where the property valuations have skyrocketed but people's incomes have not which is a lot of communities in Maine. So it's a different calculus and based on the way that shakes down right now it looks like this district would would get less.

This is not law yet, but it is before the legislature and it's supported by many um important groups. Um it's going to be supported by the main state superintendent association um for which I don't speak. I am a member but I don't speak. Um and also I believe by the MEA.

Um, and I just want to point out as we're thinking about the long-term impact of the budget that I believe it's next year that panels town property reevaluation happens. Um, and I think that we will see an an increase in that and I think Durham is coming up soon as well.

So, um, so those are town valuations.

Those are completely separate from how the state does their valuations. Um, so it will have no impact.

No, it it Well, I guess I can't say it will have no impact, but um the state are because towns and I will own that my town has a I don't even know the last time they revaluated properties in in Durham. It's a long time. Anyway, we don't even get the full like homestead exemption because our percent our equalization rate is so low relative to market value. Um and because there are towns like that that haven't re-evaluated in 10 plus years and um they're putting them in the same sort of funding EPS formula as as cities that revalue, you know, basically do an adjustment every single year to market.

Um they do their own valuation of all the towns. Um, which is why if you look at the ED279 and look at the valuation for the three specific towns, it's different than if you looked in your tax commitment book. It's because that's what the state says is the current market valuation of your towns. So, the towns can individually make their own decisions, but um the state has their own I mean, not to say they're not tied in some sort of way, but it's not a direct connection like that.

So yeah. So these these numbers, right? Yes.

These are not the town I mean those are the town numbers because that's your comes from your tax bill.

No, sorry. That like the Durham state valuation ED freeport state valuation panel state. Yes. Those are those are from the ED279. And so whether whether panel, you know, reassesses or Durham reassesses, it doesn't change any of this. Is that correct? Uh that is that is correct.

Doesn't necessarily mean so like if you looked this is a good actually a good example. So um so if you look at Durham on that page right so the Durham evaluation for per the ED279 is 692,816,667 that's an average they average over three years um to prevent spikes and valleys. Um but so that is the average of the valuation according to the state for the town of Durham. go down below to the line that says estimated impact based on the 2526 mill rate of $33.58 and the taxable valuation. The town says the property is worth 389 million versus the state saying it's worth $693 million. So they're not tied.

Thank you for pointing out that page. That's a good example. Whereas if you look at Freeports, Freeport Town says it's worth 2.6 billion and the state says it's actually worth less, but that's an average of three years. So it could be in a rising rate environment, 2.5.

So they're a lot closer.

Okay. So I'm hearing one request for information for next week, which Kelly will pull together for us. Yes.

At the direction of the Disney.

Um, any other questions, comments?

All right. To be continued.

Yep. I'm just I'm just um I'm just going back through my notes and I just I know there were a number of um a number of comments this evening that were sort that were about um sort of meeting our legal obligation and you you did say that you you uh assert that we are um but I guess I would just uh I will also go back through my notes and if there's anything there that I think is uh that I can't think of right now I will forward that to to you Tom just to sort of confirm that we are Uh uh I have full faith we are doing that because um of my trust in the administration. Um but uh I just want to make sure that we honor those concerns. Absolutely.

Okay. Um so uh item 13 is new business. Um Lois got herself uh was looking to get herself assigned to the curriculum committee.

So, do I have uh a motion just because um she's currently for official members of the committee, we do take a vote. So, um do I have a motion for consideration and approval to appoint Lois Kilby Chzley uh to the curriculum and program development committee?

Cara and Karen, thank you. Any comments other than thank you for volunteering?

All those in favor, you can vote.

Unless you want to vote opposed. You can do that, too, if you want. But too bad you're on it.

The vote passes. Okay. Uh, so that was 13A. 13B. Uh, I will get a motion on the floor and then we'll have the discussion. Do I have a motion for consideration and approval of the plan for use of remote school days to offset cancellation of school due to weather?

Is that a motion, Colin? Okay. And Steph, thank you.

Um, so as I've discussed it a few a few times now, um, we are we did officially get permission from the Department of Education, from the commissioner to repurpose March 13th, that's this Friday, as a half student day. So that means technically speaking we have not we have used four snow days but we've offset one of them. So we're at three.

Thank you folks.

That puts the last day of school at um Monday June 21st.

It's the Monday 22nd. It's the Monday of that week. So um in Yes. So, in an effort, because we're already well into June, in an effort not to go beyond the marked days on the calendar, which had been already indicated as potential storm makeup days, um I present to you this plan to keep remote school days sort of in the back pocket in case we use them. We would not invoke this unless we were going to go beyond um the Wednesday of that week, which is the 24th. So that means we have two more regular snow days before we would go to this plan.

And I will unapologetically say that we are intending this to be a serviceable but very easy and respectful plan all the way around both for the staff and for the families at home. The highlights of this plan are um for all grades, educators will be available by email during the normal school day hours. Of course, that's different depending on which school you're in. And that during that school day, educators will offer an hour of Google Meet office hours, which will be at different times, and that will be decided at the building level.

Um for grades preK to five, we will actually send physical materials home.

for grades 6 to 12. It will be online through Google Classroom.

Um, and we're asking students to check in using a Google form that um we will send out for attendance purposes. Um, service kids who receive special services will access those services remotely during the course of the school day and those teachers and service providers will work that out with the parents. will be available by email and through office hours. And parents or guardians will ensure that students are engaged with the remote learning activities as assigned, report attendance promptly, and support students in learning and accessing services remotely. Um, moving on.

I don't I don't intend to read this whole document to you. I'm just trying to give you the highlights. We've tried to make reasonable exceptions that fit within the collective bargaining agreements for work hours for both the educators and the support staff um and for administrators. Um we've noted that there are some positions that simply require the person to be present um unless it's really extreme weather and we close the buildings. But for example, you know, fields and grounds, the people who shovel the walkways, etc., they would need to come to work. Um the one um one thing to be mindful of is that we have to to for a day to count as a remote day, we have to supply lunch.

And that means realistically we have to send lunch home the day before or we have to send out drivers in the middle of the weather event to deliver lunches to everybody. We're not going to do that. Um, so the plan would be if we call a remote day, I will call it the day before and I'll call it by 100 pm.

Does this increase the likelihood that I'll call it and then it'll be beautiful sunshine the next day and it'll be a JK?

Well, yes, it does. But that's just a risk we'll have to run. The paper says 11.

11. I'm Yes, it is 11. Okay. AM. Sorry. 11 a.m.

If it's a Monday, we'll have to call it on Friday. On Friday. Yeah. Yeah.

But we have two more days before we get there.

I know. I know. Well, so I guess the question is, is this something that would be in place next year?

Yes. If you approve it, then we just we have this in our back pocket and we don't have to invent it again unless we change it.

Uh I am extremely unlikely to vote for this. Um to be I mean I think you already knew that.

Uh I just wanted to explain my thought on it uh for the rest of the board. Uh from my personal experience as a parent.

Um earlier this year we had a snow day where I had to go to one of my hospital sites and my husband had um a site visit for his job and it was a snow day and so I can't bring the because of HIPPA shockingly I can't bring my children with me to the hospital. Um so they ended up going to the job site with my husband which would make this totally untenable for us. Um two years ago we had a late storm in April. we lost power for three days um which is a no-go for internet.

So um that would have been impossible for us as well. So I'm really concerned about the equity of this proposal um in terms of folks where there are two working parents that can't parent actively making sure that they're educating um while also doing a job that maybe they can't not do. Um, I also have concerns about our support staff that maybe have to take PTO um to cover these days where others are not.

That that's how it works now. Is it? Well, for vacation like on a snow day, they Okay. Yeah. Um, yeah. From a parenting standpoint, for me, this would be um maybe not impossible, but for sure um a barrier.

And it makes me concerned, especially since one of those storms was in April.

Um and would have been almost impossible. Um that wouldn't be me electing to not send my kids to school.

I mean, I guess technically it would, but um there's a cost barrier for me.

Whereas anyone who's unwilling to extend into the summer, they can elect to not send them at the end of the summer, and that's a different election in my view. Um we can discuss the differences in quality of education at of home days versus um versus a late in the year in-person day. Um, but for me, I I just particularly since this would carry into future years, my qualms, and I said it when we discussed the calendar in January, is that we are too far away from camp time from we're just off off cycle.

We've we've gotten too late in the year start and now we're going too late in the summer. And um that's that to me is what needs to be fixed and not not teaching from home.

Chris, um I will tend to agree with with Valerie on this for probably different reasons, but um just because we have different situations, but I as a as having a second and third grader, I would see them getting significantly better education going for another day in the summer than having a blizzard bag type of situation that would happen. Um, and I also worry that we're then setting a precedent for that going forward. I I say all that acknowledging the work that's gone in this and and really appreciating the work that's gone into into this idea, but I I really struggle to see that kids would get a better outcome from having this versus having another day in the summer.

Yeah, I'll just say reading this did give me some real flashbacks to COVID.

Um, at the same time, I I would I do think that, you know, every family is going to have a different situation, every every child, every age group, and if we're if we're talking about our own children and what we're thinking, I think my kids would probably learn more in a remote day than they would in the last day of school. That's end of June, mid to end of June. So, it is something that I would like to see as an option.

Um, though I'm I'm hearing what you're saying, Valerie, too, and I'm um it's a concern.

Question is, this is um the intention is that it wouldn't be our policy for snow days in general in the future. It would just be if we exceed a certain amount and then we would shift to this.

The current thinking is that yes, we would only use this to keep us from going beyond the days marked on the calendar as snow make it and there are five because we love data. Do we know how frequently in the last years we've gone over five? I don't.

The good news is that with climate change, this is becoming less and less of an issue. So, um, right, we're going to start having also my wife lost her job working on that. So, I don't know. I don't know.

Maybe, uh, you know, it's all up in the air.

Luckily, next year's calendar looks a bit different. Um, so we're not extending as late into the summer, right? Yeah, that's that was one of the things I was going to point out is is this was sort of an unusual year with we started later than almost we ever do and then the way the holiday the the winter break fell. Um it was two full weeks which we haven't had in I can't even remember the last time. So I mean all of those things pushed us farther and farther into June. Um, you know, to to Valerie's point, um, that is, you know, that was an unfortunate this year that that's the way it happened. Um, you know, that that varies year to year with how the calendar works and and trying to get that squared away with with the other two districts that we have to align with. Um, you know, I I definitely wouldn't be supportive of this being our, you know, instead of snow days, we're going to do this. I don't think this is, you know, should be our our go-to plan. Um, I am curious if this has to be approved by the DOE to count or if there's a certain number of kids that have to participate for it to count. Like if we have a plan that says we're going to do this and not one kid checks in, does it count?

Uh, the DOE does not need to approve this plan. it. This the school board needs to approve the plan, but they get to decide we have to to provide food, but they don't have they don't care about the rest. Well, that's a federal regulation.

Okay. So, to count as a school day, you have to provide food. Yep. Okay.

You have to do lunch. Um, so the school board, as long as the school board approves the plan, we we are set to use it. Um, and to my best understanding, the regular uh requirements around attendance would apply.

which is what I don't remember the cut off off the top of my head, but so like there could be a random Tuesday where no kids showed up and it wouldn't count as a day.

Yes.

Like maybe June 23rd or something like that.

That's a great point. What if it's the last day of school? You got to keep coming guys until someone shows up. Valerie, if a child can't attend a remote day due to access, is there a way to get that excused? Oh, I'm sure. Yes.

I mean, I would say that's probably similar to on, you know, on a storm day if we have school, but there's families that don't have power, if they call and say, "We don't have power." Like, I think that is an excused absence.

Is that something that could be added to this a statement? It certainly could be. Yep.

Yeah. Because I I think you're right. I mean, there are will be scenarios where that's just not workable. Um, so Lois, so my perspective on this is this is a lot of trust.

I don't really see Tom randomly calling the day if it's just going to snow and making it a remote day in April. If it's a blizzard and they're predicting 17 inches of snow like New York got two weeks ago, I would hope you would make it a remote day. But it if it's just a just a storm, we have to look at what the ultimate outcome of that storm might be. If it's two inches, maybe it's not a remote day.

I mean, and I can tell you exactly how that process works. I'm up at like, you know, 4 in the morning, but Jeremy and the road commissioners are up an hour before that and I get a call and say, "How's it look?" And they say, "We got to cancel or we got to delay." I I just take the advice of the people on the ground.

Except you now have to decide before it even started.

That's true. So that would be sitting with the team and making a call. Well, Yeah.

I mean, and and I guess that's the other thing, right? So, if at 11 o'clock in the morning it's looking like 2 in, you're probably not going to call it.

But if we get 20 in, sorry guys, it's an extra day in June. Yeah, cuz we don't have to use this, but you could cancel school for any number of reasons, right? I mean, just cuz I want to. Well, just cuz you want to.

Exactly, Tom. That's why we hired you for that kind of that kind of whim uh whim based supervision of the schools. Uh yeah, that was just what I was going to ask is like Yeah. So like if you didn't call it on Friday because it was you know it's supposed to be beautiful and then we got a foot of snow, you would just we're just like we're not going to we're not like we're just it's going to be a snow day. Um yeah. I think the only thing I was going to add is like I think this to I was going back to Stephanie's questions and I was like how many of these questions apply to this? Um and I think it's you know it's it's very helpful. I think they're they're great questions and I think I think at the end of the day I guess where I'm falling I really appreciate the way Valerie and Chris talked about it. I think for me I think that I don't think the administrators would have brought this to us if this was bad for kids and their families. like I just I think this is the this is the best option they could come up with um based on the factors that uh are there and I think to again to Stephanie's point it's like um we either trust that they can run the school um or we don't um at at a certain binary level. Um, again, um, when it gets to be your sort of whims of just sort of like, oh, my whims are so, um, it gets it starts to I'm starting to doubt doubt myself in decisions I've made in the past on hiring committees.

Um but uh yeah, I think again that's the way that's the way I'm thinking about it is just that I think that um is that we wouldn't have been brought something that would be bad for our kids, especially given what all of the teachers know about the experience of children during COVID. Um that would be that would be something that'd be really something if they did that.

And it's you know back to the question of flexibility. It's not financial flexibility, but it provides an provides an avenue in the appropriate scenarios.

It doesn't lock you into using it, but it gives you the opportunity if it if it fits, right? Um, so yeah.

Can you explain is this a district guideline? It's not a district policy. It is not a policy. So what is it? It's a remote snow day plan.

Plan. Okay. It's on green, don't you? It's obvious. Obviously, it's on green.

I don't know, Tom. I think I think we'd kind of like to see it. It's a policy committee. I think it'd be really fun. Take a take a look. Oh, sorry. No, we don't.

Um I g I guess the I was under the understanding that the DOE had requirements for how to use remote school days. Maybe they don't anymore.

I checked with the deputy commissioner and he said, "No, you just need your school board to approve it." It's crazy, but okay. Um, okay. Any other further comments or questions? We do have a motion and a second before Cara leaves in case she wants to vote.

Oh, she's just getting a cookie.

What? We have already have the motion on the floor before 10. We can finish whatever we're talking about. We just can't start something new.

Yeah. Um, any other comments or questions?

Nope. All right. All those in favor opposed.

All right, that passes.

Um, okay. So, now we have to take a motion to take up business after 10:00.

I really hate this motion, the fact the number of times we've had to use it.

There is only one more thing left on the agenda other than public comment. So, um, so I'm I'm thinking it's going to be pretty quick. So, do I have a motion?

Thank you, Chris. Second, Colin. All those in favor? You could you can vote no. It's okay.

Kate Brown always used to vote no on this. Okay. Um Okay. So, one more motion here.

So, do I have a motion for consideration and approval to write a letter in support of the town of Panel's construction of a joint fire and rescue station and public works facility?

Cara and Chris, thank you. So, in your packet is a little letter on blue, which apparently is for letters, um that we received, um from a consultant that's working with the town of Powell. um they are um they are applying for some uh I think some match funds or grant funds to help support the construction of the project and they are asking for a letter of support from us as the school district saying that this would help the community and you know that is we're the students are a part of our district. Um the back is the uh the sample letter that she was kind enough to provide to us. Um generally I I would I I am supportive of this. Um but they sent it to us last week with like a quick turnaround and I felt a little bad because I you know Tom and I didn't have the authority to say that the board wanted to write this letter without talking to you all. So Lois So because all of my like questions were not answered in this, I called the town of Felo and I talked to Becky who's their townator.

Y and I asked several questions that I was concerned about.

I don't need to go over every every one of them unless you want me to. But she assured me that this had been talked about for four years in panel that the community's familiar with the topic because I couldn't tell whether this was a bunch of people just coming together saying, "Hey, let's ask for a letter of support." I didn't know who these who this person was or who she represented.

Becky assured me that it's been on the table. It's going to go to the town at the town meeting as a warrant. They're actually getting the warrant language approved by the lawyer as we speak. Um, and so having had those questions answered, I'm thinking that this is a good thing to do because yes, the date may have passed for Pingry, for Shelley Pingry, but it has not passed for Senator Collins who holds the bigger pot of money.

So, Senator King and Representative Pingry both hold money, but because Senator Collins is, I believe, the head of appropriations, she has a huge pot. And so, they that deadline for that pot of money is April 19. No, hasn't passed yet.

Is I think the a I think it's the 19th of March, although I just said April.

Now, now my brain has gone blank on whether it's April or March, but we haven't gotten to that date yet. And they can get that letter attached to their application for Senator Collins in the hopes of being able to access Collins's money.

Yeah, I I Yeah, I read her letter is that she was contracted by the town, but thank you for confirming that.

I just I mean, I don't mean I guess she could have just said that and I don't know who's representing who anymore. So, yeah. Um, yeah.

Well, thank you for doing that extra leg work. It was my pleasure. I had a chance to talk to Becky. Yeah.

So, you feel comfortable with this after that conversation?

Yes. And if anyone has any questions, I do have the answers written on a scrap.

Any questions, comments?

All right, we have a motion and a second. All those in favor? Great. None opposed. Thank you.

All right. So, we will get that letter drafted and over to them ASAP so they can attach it to their project.

All right. So, that is all of our new business. We have no personnel. We do have public comment and we do have a few folks who who hung in there. So, we will provide the opportunity if anyone's interested in speaking. Same rules apply. No one's diving at the opportunity.

Okay. Well, then I will take a motion to adjurnn. Cara and Steph. All those in favor?

Thank you.

============================================================

