SOURCE: https://www.rsu5.org/fs/resource-manager/view/6b4ae554-0633-4257-904a-425564ab167a
SECTION: /board-of-directors-and-policies/adopted-policies-and-procedures
TITLE: ACAB-R-Employee Discrimination/Harassment and Title IX Sexual Harassment Complaint Procedures
TYPE: Finalsite-PDF
============================================================

NEPN/NSBA CODE: ACAB-R
EMPLOYEE DISCRIMINATION/HARASSMENT AND TITLE IX SEXUAL
HARASSMENT COMPLAINT PROCEDURES
The Board has adopted these employee procedures in order to provide prompt and equitable
resolution of employee complaints of discrimination and harassment, including sexual
harassment, as described in policies AC – Nondiscrimination/Equal Opportunity and Affirmative
Action and ACAB – Harassment and Sexual Harassment of School Employees.
The complaint procedure in Section 2 may also be used, to the extent applicable, by visitors,
including parents, volunteers and others having lawful access to the schools who wish to make a
complaint of discrimination or harassment.
Complaints alleging harassment or discrimination against students based on a protected category
should be addressed through the Board’s Student Discrimination/
Harassment and Title IX Sexual Harassment Complaint Procedures (ACAA-R).
Any individual who is unsure about whether discrimination or harassment has occurred and/or or
which complaint procedure applies is encouraged to contact the Affirmative Action Officer/Title
IX Coordinator.
Erica Mazzeo, Charlie Mellon,
Assistant Assistant Principal,
Superintendent FHS
17 West Street 30 Holbrook Street
Freeport, ME 04032 Freeport, ME 04032
207-865-0928 207-865-4706
mazzeoe@rsu5.org mellonc@rsu5.org
Section 1. Definitions
For purposes of these complaint procedures, the following definitions will be used. The
Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator shall assess all reports and complaints to ensure
that they are addressed under the appropriate policy and complaint procedure.
A. Discrimination/Harassment Complaint Procedure Definitions
1. “Discrimination or harassment”: Discrimination or harassment on the basis of an
individual’s membership in a protected category, which, for employees, includes
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 1 of 15

NEPN/NSBA CODE: ACAB-R
race (including traits associated with race involving hair texture, Afro hairstyles
and protective hairstyles such as braids, twists and locks), color, sex, sexual
orientation, gender identity, age, religion, ancestry, national origin, genetic
information or disability.
2. “Discrimination”: Treating individuals differently, or interfering with or
preventing them from enjoying the advantages or privileges afforded to others
because of their membership in a protected category.
3. “Harassment”: Oral, written, graphic, electronic or physical conduct relating to
an individual’s actual or perceived membership in a protected category that is
sufficiently severe, pervasive or persistent so as to interfere with or limit that
individual’s ability to participate in the RSU No. 5’s programs or activities by
creating a hostile, intimidating or offensive environment.
4. Under Title VII and under Maine law/regulations, sexual harassment is defined
differently than under Title IX. Maine Human Rights Commission regulations
define sexual harassment as conduct on the basis of sex which satisfies one or
more of the following:
a. Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a term
or condition of an individual’s employment;
b. Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an employee is used as the
basis for employment decisions affecting the employee; or
c. Such conduct has the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with an
individual’s work performance or creating an intimidating, hostile or
offensive working environment.
5. “Sexual orientation”: Under Maine law, this means a person’s “actual or
perceived heterosexuality, bisexuality, homosexuality or gender identity or
expression.”
6. “Gender identity”: Under Maine law, this means “the gender-related identity,
appearance, mannerisms or other gender-related characteristics of an individual,
regardless of the individual’s assigned sex at birth.”
7. “Complaint” is defined as an allegation that an employee or other third party has
been discriminated against or harassed on the basis of race, color, sex, sexual
orientation, gender identity, age, religion, ancestry, national origin, genetic
information or disability (and in regard to sex, conduct not otherwise addressed in
the Title IX regulations and Section 3 of ACAB-R).
8. “Employee”: Whenever the term “employee” is used in Section 2, it includes
visitors or others who have a lawful basis to make a complaint of discrimination
or harassment.
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 2 of 15

NEPN/NSBA CODE: ACAB-R
B. Title IX Sexual Harassment Complaint Procedure Definitions
1. “Title IX sexual harassment”: Under the federal Title IX regulations, sexual
harassment includes the following conduct on the basis of sex which takes place
within the context of RSU No. 5’s education programs and activities:
a. “Quid pro quo” sexual harassment by a school employee: Conditioning a
school aid, benefit or service (such as a promotion or favorable evaluation)
on an individual’s participation in unwelcome sexual conduct;
b. “Hostile environment” sexual harassment: Unwelcome conduct based on
sex that a reasonable person would determine is so severe, pervasive and
objectively offensive that it effectively denies an individual’s equal access
to the RSU No. 5’s education programs and activities; or
c. Sexual assault, dating violence, domestic violence and stalking as these
terms are defined in federal laws.
2. “Report”: Under the Title IX regulations, any individual may make a report of
sexual harassment involving an employee, whether the individual is the alleged
victim or not. A report must be made to the Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX
Coordinator. A report triggers certain actions by the AAO/Title IX Coordinator
for the alleged victim of sexual harassment, but an investigation is not conducted
unless a “Formal Complaint” is filed.
3. “Formal Complaint”: Under Title IX, the alleged victim of sexual harassment can
file a written complaint that triggers the complaint procedure in Section 3 of
ACAB-R. Only a school employee (and in certain circumstances, the AAO/Title
IX Coordinator) may file a formal complaint.
4. “Employee”: For the purpose of this procedure, “employee” means an applicant
for employment or a current employee of RSU No. 5.
Section 2. Discrimination/Harassment Complaint Procedure
This procedure should be used for any complaint of unlawful harassment or discrimination based
on a protected category which does not involve Title IX sexual harassment.
A. How to Make A Complaint
1. An employee who believes they have been unlawfully harassed or discriminated
against (as such terms are defined in Section 1.A.1-3) is encouraged to try to resolve
the problem by informing the individual(s) that the behavior is unwelcome or
offensive, and requesting that the behavior stop. This shall not prevent the employee
from making an immediate complaint to the AAO/Title IX Coordinator.
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 3 of 15

NEPN/NSBA CODE: ACAB-R
2. Any employee who believes they have been harassed or discriminated against
should report their concern promptly to the AAO/Title IX Coordinator. A written
complaint must include basic information concerning the allegation of harassment or
discrimination (i.e., date, time, location, individual(s) who alleged engaged in
harassment or discrimination, description of allegation).
3. Employees who are unsure as to whether unlawful discrimination or harassment
has occurred, or who need assistance in preparing a written complaint, are encouraged
to discuss the matter with the AAO/Title IX Coordinator.
4. Employees will not be retaliated against for reporting suspected discrimination or
harassment, or for participating in an investigation. Retaliation is illegal under
federal and state nondiscrimination laws, and any retaliation will result in disciplinary
measures, up to and including discharge.
5. Any employee who believes they have been discriminated against or harassed is
encouraged to utilize the RSU No. 5’s complaint procedure. However, employees are
hereby notified that they also have the right to report incidents of discrimination or
harassment to the Maine Human Rights Commission, 51 State House Station,
Augusta, Maine 04333 (telephone: 207-624-6290) and/or to the federal Office for
Civil Rights, U.S. Department of Education, 5 Post Office Square, 8th Floor, Boston,
MA 02109-3921 (telephone: 617-289-0111).
B. Complaint Handling and Investigation
1. The AAO/Title IX Coordinator will promptly inform the Superintendent and the
person who is the subject of the complaint (respondent) that a complaint has been
received.
2. The AAO/Title IX Coordinator may pursue an informal resolution of the
complaint with the agreement of the parties involved. Any party to the complaint may
decide to end the informal resolution process and pursue the formal process at any
point. Any informal resolution is subject to the approval of the parties and the
Superintendent, who shall consider whether the resolution is in the best interest of
RSU No. 5 and the parties in light of the particular circumstances and applicable
policies and laws.
3. The AAO/Title IX Coordinator may implement supportive measures (consistent
with any applicable collective bargaining agreement provisions) to reduce the risk of
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 4 of 15

NEPN/NSBA CODE: ACAB-R
further discrimination or harassment while an investigation is pending. Examples of
supportive measures include, but are not limited to, ordering no contact between the
individuals involved; changing a work location or changing a work schedule.
4. The complaint will be investigated by a trained internal or external individual
designated by the Superintendent and the AAO/Title IX Coordinator. Any complaint
about an employee who holds a supervisory position shall be investigated by a person
who is not subject to that supervisor’s authority. Any complaint about the
Superintendent should be submitted to the Chair of the Board, who should consult
with legal counsel concerning the handling and investigation of the complaint.
5. The investigator shall consult with the AAO/Title IX Coordinator as agreed
during the investigation process.
6. The respondent will be provided with an opportunity to be heard as part of the
investigation. The complainant shall not be required to attend meetings with the
respondent, but may choose to do so as part of an informal resolution process.
7. The complainant and the respondent may suggest witnesses and/or submit
materials they believe are relevant to the complaint.
8. If the complaint is against an employee of RSU No. 5, any rights conferred under
an applicable collective bargaining agreement shall be applied.
9. Privacy rights of all parties to the complaint shall be maintained in accordance
with applicable state and federal laws.
10. The investigation shall be completed within 40 business days of receiving the
complaint, if practicable. Reasonable extensions of time for good reason shall be
allowed.
11. The investigator shall provide a written report and findings to the AAO/Title IX
Coordinator.
C. Findings and Subsequent Actions
1. The AAO/Title IX Coordinator shall consult with the Superintendent concerning
the investigation and findings.
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 5 of 15

NEPN/NSBA CODE: ACAB-R
2. If there is a finding that discrimination or harassment occurred, the AAO/Title IX
Coordinator, in consultation with the Superintendent:
a. Shall determine what remedial action, if any, is required to end the
discrimination or harassment, remedy its effect and prevent recurrence; and
b. Determine what disciplinary action should be taken against the
individual(s) who engaged in discrimination or harassment, if any.
3. Inform the complainant and the respondent in writing of the results of the
investigation and its resolution (in accordance with applicable state and federal
privacy laws).
D. Appeals
1. After the conclusion of the investigation, the complainant or respondent may seek
an appeal of the findings solely on the basis of either: (a) prejudicial procedural error
or (b) the discovery of previously unavailable relevant evidence that could
significantly impact the outcome.
2. Appeals must be submitted in writing to the Superintendent within five business
days after receiving notice of the resolution.
3. Upon receipt of a valid appeal, the Superintendent shall provide notice to the
other party, along with an opportunity to provide a written statement within five
business days.
4. The Superintendent shall review the available documentation and may conduct
further investigation if deemed appropriate.
5. The Superintendent’s decision on the appeal shall be provided to the parties
within 10 business days, if practicable. The Superintendent’s decision shall be final.
E. Records
The AAO/Title IX Coordinator shall keep a written record of the complaint process.
Section 3. Title IX Sexual Harassment Complaint Procedure
This section should be used only for complaints of Title IX sexual harassment as defined in
Section 1.B.1.
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 6 of 15

NEPN/NSBA CODE: ACAB-R
A. How to Make A Report
1. Any individual who believes an employee has been sexually harassed (as this
term is defined in Section 1.B.1) may make a report to the AAO/Title IX Coordinator.
2. If the individual making the report is the alleged victim, or if the alleged victim is
identified by the individual making the report, the AAO/Title IX Coordinator will
meet with the alleged victim to discuss supportive measures that may be appropriate
in the particular circumstances and explain the process for filing a formal complaint.
a. Supportive measures are individualized measures designed to ensure the
employee can continue to access and perform their work (such as requiring no
contact between individuals, temporarily moving work locations or changing
schedules, etc.).
b. Supportive measures may be continued even if the alleged victim chooses
not to file a formal complaint, if appropriate under the particular
circumstances.
3. RSU No. 5 cannot provide an informal resolution process for resolving a report
until a formal complaint is filed.
4. Employees will not be retaliated against for reporting sexual harassment, or for
participating in an investigation. Retaliation is illegal under federal and state
nondiscrimination laws, and any retaliation will result in disciplinary actions, up to
and including discharge.
5. Any employee who believes they have been the victim of sexual harassment is
encouraged to utilize RSU No. 5’s complaint procedures. However, employees are
hereby notified that they also have the right to report sexual harassment to the Maine
Human Rights Commission, 51 State House Station, Augusta, Maine 04333
(telephone: 207-624-6290) and/or to the federal Office for Civil Rights, U.S.
Department of Education, 5 Post Office Square, 8th Floor, Boston, MA 02109-3921
(telephone: 617-289-0111).
6. The Superintendent shall be informed of all reports and formal complaints of
sexual harassment.
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 7 of 15

NEPN/NSBA CODE: ACAB-R
B. How to Make A Formal Complaint
1. An alleged victim may file a formal written complaint requesting investigation of
alleged Title IX sexual harassment. The written complaint
must include basic information concerning the allegation of sexual harassment (i.e.,
date, time, location, individual(s) who alleged engaged in sexual harassment,
description of allegation).
Employees who need assistance in preparing a formal written complaint, are
encouraged to consult with the AAO/Title IX Coordinator.
2. In certain circumstances, the AAO/Title IX Coordinator may file a formal
complaint even when the alleged victim chooses not to. Examples include if the
respondent (person alleged to have engaged in sexual harassment) has been found
responsible for previous sexual harassment or there is a safety threat within RSU No.
5). In such cases, the alleged victim is not a party to the case, but will receive notices
as required by the Title IX regulations at specific points in the complaint process.
3. In accordance with the Title IX regulations, the AAO/Title IX Coordinator must
dismiss a formal complaint under this Title IX procedure if: a) the conduct alleged in
the formal complaint does not constitute sexual harassment under the Title IX
regulations and this policy; b) if the conduct alleged did not occur within the scope of
RSU No. 5’s education programs and activities, or c) did not occur in the United
States.
4. In accordance with the Title IX regulations, the AAO/Title IX Coordinator may
dismiss a formal complaint under this Title IX procedure if: a) a complainant
withdraws the formal complaint, or withdraws particular allegations within the
complaint; b) the respondent is no longer employed by RSU No. 5; or c) there are
specific circumstances that prevent RSU No. 5 from gathering evidence sufficient to
reach a determination regarding the formal complaint.
5. If a formal complaint is dismissed under this Title IX procedure, the AAO/Title
IX Coordinator will promptly and simultaneously send written notices to the parties
explaining the reasons. Parties have the opportunity to appeal dismissals in
accordance with subsection I below.
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 8 of 15

NEPN/NSBA CODE: ACAB-R
6. If the conduct alleged potentially violates other laws, Board policies and/or
professional expectations, RSU No. 5’s may address the conduct under Section 2 or
another applicable policy/procedure.
C. Administrative Leave
1. The Superintendent may place an employee respondent on administrative leave
during the complaint procedure in accordance with any applicable State laws, school
policies and collective bargaining agreement provisions.
2. Any decision to place an employee respondent on administrative leave shall be
made in compliance with any applicable disability laws, including Section 504 of the
Rehabilitation Act and the Americans with Disabilities Act.
D. Notice to Parties of Formal Complaint
1. The Title IX Coordinator will provide to the parties written notice of the formal
complaint and allegations of sexual harassment potentially constituting prohibited
conduct under the Title IX regulations and this procedure. The notice will include:
a. Notice regarding the complaint procedure and the availability of an
informal resolution process;
b. Sufficient details known at the time (including identities of parties, if
known; the conduct alleged; and the date and location of the alleged
incident, if known), with sufficient time to prepare before any initial
interview (not less than five business days);
c. As required by the Title IX regulations, a statement that the respondent is
presumed not responsible for the alleged conduct and that a determination
of responsibility will be made at the conclusion of the complaint); and that
the parties may inspect and review evidence;
d. Notice that the parties may each have an advisor of their choice (who may
be an attorney), and that the parties may inspect and review evidence;
e. Notice that knowingly making false statements or submitting false
information during the complaint procedure is prohibited and may result in
disciplinary action; and
f. Notice of the name of the investigator, with sufficient time (no less than
three business days) to raise concerns of conflict of interest or bias.
2. If additional allegations become known at a later time, notice of the additional
allegations will be provided to the parties.
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 9 of 15

NEPN/NSBA CODE: ACAB-R
3. The AAO/Title IX Coordinator will discuss supportive measures with each party
and implement such measures as appropriate.
E. Informal Resolution Process
After a formal complaint has been filed, and if the AAO/Title IX Coordinator believes the
circumstances are appropriate, the AAO/Title IX Coordinator may offer the parties the
opportunity to participate in an informal resolution process to resolve the complaint
without completing the investigation and determination process. Informal resolutions
cannot be used to resolve a formal complaint where a student is the complainant and the
respondent is an employee.
Informal resolutions can take many forms, depending on the particular case. Examples
include, but are not limited to, facilitated discussions between the parties; restorative
justice; acknowledgment of responsibility by a respondent; apologies; disciplinary
actions against a respondent or a requirement to engage in specific services; or supportive
measures. Both parties must voluntarily agree in writing to participate in an informal
resolution process, and either party can withdraw from the process at any time. The
Superintendent must agree to the terms of any informal resolution reached between the
parties. If an informal resolution agreement is reached, it must be signed by both parties
and RSU No. 5. Any such signed agreement is final and binding according to its terms.
If an informal resolution process does not resolve the formal complaint, nothing from the
informal resolution process may be considered as evidence in the subsequent
investigation or determination.
F. Investigation
1. The complaint will be investigated by a trained internal or external individual
designated by the Superintendent and AAO/Title IX Coordinator. Any complaint about
an employee who holds a supervisory position shall be investigated by a person who is
not subject to that supervisor’s authority. Any complaint about the Superintendent
should be submitted to the Chair of the Board, who should consult with legal counsel
concerning the handling and investigation of the complaint.
2. The investigator shall consult with the AAO/Title IX Coordinator as agreed during
the investigation process.
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 10 of 15

NEPN/NSBA CODE: ACAB-R
3. If the complaint is against an employee of RSU No. 5, rights conferred under an
applicable collective bargaining agreement shall be applied, to the extent they do not
conflict with the Title IX regulatory requirements.
4. Privacy rights of all parties to the complaint shall be maintained in accordance with
applicable state and federal laws.
5. The investigator will:
a. Meet with each party after they have received appropriate notice of any
meeting and its purpose, with sufficient time to prepare.
b. Allow parties to have their advisor at all meetings related to the complaint,
although advisors may not speak on behalf of a party or interfere with the
process.
c. Allow parties a reasonable opportunity to identify witnesses and submit
favorable and unfavorable evidence.
d. Interview witnesses and conduct such other activities that will assist in
ascertaining facts (site visits, review of documents, etc.).
e. Consider evidence that is relevant and directly related to the allegations in
the formal complaint.
f. During the course of the investigation, provide both parties with an equal
opportunity to inspect and review any evidence that is obtained in the
investigation that is directly related to the allegations in the formal
complaint (including evidence which RSU No. 5 does not intend to rely
upon in reaching a determination of responsibility), and favorable and
unfavorable evidence.
g. Prior to completion of the investigation report, provide each party and
advisor (if any) the evidence subject to inspection and review, and provide
the parties with ten business days to submit a written response.
h. Consider the parties’ written responses to the evidence prior to completing
the investigation report.
i. Create an investigative report that fairly summarizes relevant evidence and
send the report to the parties and advisors (if any), for their review and
written responses within ten business days of receipt.
j. After receipt of the parties’ written responses (if any), forward the
investigation report and party responses to the assigned decision maker.
6. The investigation shall be concluded within 40 business days if practicable.
Reasonable extension of time for good reason shall be allowed.
G. Determination of Responsibility
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 11 of 15

NEPN/NSBA CODE: ACAB-R
1. The decision maker shall provide the parties with the opportunity to submit
written, relevant questions that the party wants asked of another party or witness
within five business days of when the decision maker received the investigation
report and party responses.
a. The decision maker shall explain to a party proposing questions if the
decision maker excludes a question as not relevant.
2. Each party shall be provided the opportunity to review the responses of another
party and/or witness, and to ask limited written follow-up questions within five
business days of receiving the answers.
3. Each party will receive a copy of the responses to any follow-up questions.
4. The decision maker shall review the investigation report, the parties’ responses
and other relevant materials, applying the preponderance of the evidence standard
(“more likely than not”).
5. The decision maker shall issue a written determination, which shall include the
following:
a. Identification of all the allegations potentially constituting sexual
harassment as defined in the Title IX regulations and this policy;
b. A description of the procedural steps taken from receipt of the formal
complaint through the determination, including notifications to the parties,
interviews with parties and witnesses, site visits, methods used to gather
other evidence, and meetings held;
c. A determination regarding responsibility as to each allegation and findings
of fact supporting the determinations;
d. A statement of, and rationale for, the result as to each allegation, including
a determination regarding responsibility, any disciplinary sanctions RSU
No. 5 imposes on the respondent, and whether remedies designed to
restore or preserve equal access to RSU No. 5’s programs and activities
will be provided to the complainant;
e. RSU No. 5’s appeal procedure and permissible bases for the parties to
appeal the determination.
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 12 of 15

NEPN/NSBA CODE: ACAB-R
6. The written determination shall be provided to the parties simultaneously. The
determination concerning responsibility becomes final either on the date that RSU
No. 5 provides the parties with the written determination of the results of the appeal,
if an appeal is filed, or if an appeal is not filed, the date on which the appeal would no
longer be considered timely.
H. Remedies, Discipline and Other Actions
1. Remedies
Remedies are measures used to ensure that the complainant has equal access to RSU No.
5’s education programs and activities following the decision maker’s determination.
Such remedies may include supportive measures, and may include other appropriate
measures, depending upon the determination and the needs of the complainant. The Title
IX Coordinator is responsible for implementing remedies and providing any needed
assistance to the Complainant.
2. Discipline and Other Actions
The following are examples of the types of disciplinary actions that may be imposed on
an employee when there is a determination that they are responsible for one or more
violations involving sexual harassment:
● Written warning.
● Probation.
● Demotion.
● Suspension without pay.
● Discharge.
The following are examples of other types of actions that may be imposed on an
employee when there is a determination of responsibility:
● Performance improvement plan.
● Counseling.
● Training.
● Loss of leadership/stipend position.
I. Appeals
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 13 of 15

NEPN/NSBA CODE: ACAB-R
The parties have the opportunity to appeal a determination regarding responsibility, and
from dismissals of formal complaints. Under the Title IX regulations, appeals are
allowed on the following grounds:
1. A procedural irregularity that affected the outcome of the matter;
2. New evidence that was not reasonably available at the time the determination
regarding responsibility or dismissal of the formal complaint was made, that could
affect the outcome of the matter; or
3. The Title IX Coordinator, investigator, or decision maker had a conflict of interest
or bias for or against complainants or respondents generally, or the individual
complainant or respondent that affected the outcome of the matter.
An appeal must be filed in writing within five business days of receiving the determination,
stating the grounds for the appeal and including any relevant documentation in support of the
appeal. Appeals submitted after this deadline are not timely and shall not be considered.
1. Appeals must be filed with the Superintendent, who will consider the appeal.
2. The Superintendent shall conduct an impartial review of the appeal, including
consideration of the written record of the matter, and may consult with legal counsel
or other RSU No. 5 officials in making their decision.
3. The Superintendent shall issue a written decision describing the result of the
appeal and rationale for the result, and provide the written decision simultaneously to
the parties. The decision will either deny the appeal; grant the appeal and remand to
the decision maker for further consideration; or grant the appeal by revising the
disciplinary action(s).
J. Records
Records in connection with sexual harassment reports and the complaint process shall be
maintained for a minimum of seven years.
Legal References: Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 (20 U.S.C. § 1681 et seq.);
34 C.F.R. Part 106
Clery Act (20 U.S.C. §1092(f)(6)(A)(v) - definition of sexual assault)
Violence Against Women Act (34 U.S.C. § 1092(f)(6)(A)(v) – definition of
sexual assault; 34 U.S.C. § 12291(a)(10) – dating violence; 34 U.S.C.
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 14 of 15

NEPN/NSBA CODE: ACAB-R
§12291(a)(3) – definition of stalking; 34 U.S.C. §12291(a)(8) – definition
of domestic violence)
Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. § 2000d)
Americans with Disabilities Act (42 U.S.C § 12101 et seq.), as amended
Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (Section 504) (29 U.S.C. §
794 et seq.), as amended
Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. § 2000e, et. seq.; 29
C.F.R. § 1604.11)
Age Discrimination in Employment Act (29 U.S.C. § 623 et seq.)
Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act of 2008 (42 U.S.C. § 2000ff et seq.)
Cross Reference: AC – Nondiscrimination/Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action
ACAB – Harassment and Sexual Harassment of School Employees
GBGB – Workplace Bullying
Adopted: May 27, 2009
Revised: December 8, 2010
Revised: April 25, 2012
Reviewed: November 20, 2013
Revised: October 14, 2020
Revised: February 26, 2025
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 15 of 15