SOURCE: https://www.rsu5.org/fs/resource-manager/view/a1ac2641-ff8a-4b50-b341-c82e5e0b6772
SECTION: /board-of-directors-and-policies/adopted-policies-and-procedures
TITLE: EBCC-Bomb Threats.pdf
TYPE: Finalsite-PDF
============================================================

NEPN/NSBA Code: EBCC
BOMB THREATS
The RSU No. 5 Board of Directors recognizes that bomb threats are a significant concern to the school
unit. Whether real and carried out or intended as a prank or for some other purpose, a bomb threat
represents a potential danger to the safety and welfare of students and staff and to the integrity of school
property. Bomb threats disrupt the instructional program and learning environment and also place
significant demands on school financial resources and public safety services. These effects occur even
when such threats prove to be false.
Any bomb threat will be regarded as an extremely serious matter and treated accordingly. The Board
directs the Superintendent to react promptly and appropriately to information concerning bomb threats
and to initiate or recommend suitable disciplinary action.
A. Conduct Prohibited
No person shall make, or communicate by any means, whether verbal or non-verbal, a threat that a bomb
has been, or will be, placed on school premises. Because of the potential for evacuation of the schools
and other disruption of school operations, placement of a bomb or of a "look-alike" bomb on school
premises will be considered a threat for the purpose of this policy.
It is also a violation of Board policy to communicate by any means that any toxic or hazardous
substance or material has been placed, or will be placed, on school premises with the intent to endanger
the safety and welfare of students or staff and/or to disrupt the operations of the schools. For the purpose
of this policy, "toxic or hazardous substance or material" means any material or substance, including
biomedical materials or organisms, that, when placed as threatened, could be harmful to humans.
B. Definitions:
1. A "bomb" means an explosive, incendiary or poison gas bomb, grenade, rocket, missile,
mine, "Molotov cocktail" or other destructive device.
2. A "look-alike bomb" means any apparatus or object that conveys the appearance of a bomb
or other destructive device.
3. A "bomb threat" is the communication, by any means, whether verbal or non-verbal, that a
bomb has been, or will be, placed on school premises, including possession or placement of a
bomb or look-alike bomb on school premises.
4. "School premises" means any school property and any location where any school activities
may take place.
C. Development of Bomb Threat Procedures
The Superintendent/designee shall be responsible for developing and implementing procedures
specific to bomb threats as part of RSU No. 5’s Comprehensive Health and Safety and Emergency
Management Plan. These procedures are intended to inform administrators and staff of
appropriate protocols to follow in the event that a bomb threat is received and should include
provisions to address:
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 1 of 4

NEPN/NSBA Code: EBCC
1. Threat assessment (for the purpose of identifying a response that is in proportion to the
threat, in light of what is necessary to ensure safety);
2. Building evacuation and re-entry (including selection of potential alternative sites for those
who are evacuated);
3. Incident "command and control" (who is in charge, and when);
4. Communications contacts and mandatory bomb threat reporting;
5. Parent notification process;
6. Training for staff members, and
7. Support services for students and staff.
The initial bomb threat procedure will be subject to approval by the Board of Directors. The
Superintendent/designee will be responsible for overseeing a review or evaluation of bomb threat
procedures prior to the Board’s required annual approval of the Comprehensive Health and
Safety and Emergency Management Plan, or following implementation of the procedure in
response to a specific threat.
D. Reporting of Bomb Threats
A student who learns of a bomb threat or the existence of a bomb on school premises must
immediately report such information to the building principal, teacher, the School Resource
Officer or other employee in a position of authority.
An employee of RSU No. 5 who learns of a bomb threat shall immediately inform the building
administrator. The building administrator shall immediately take appropriate steps to protect the
safety of students and staff in accordance with the school unit's bomb threat procedure, as
developed under Section C, and inform the Superintendent of the threat.
All bomb threats shall be reported immediately to the local law enforcement authority, as
provided in the bomb threat procedures.
The Superintendent shall be responsible for reporting any bomb threat to the Department of
Education within two business days of the incident. Reports will include the name of the school,
the date and time of the threat, the medium used to communicate the threat, and whether or not
the perpetrators have been apprehended.
E. Student Disciplinary Consequences
Making a bomb threat is a crime under Maine law. Any student suspected of making a bomb
threat shall be reported to law enforcement authorities for investigation and possible prosecution.
Apart from any penalty imposed by law, and without regard to the existence or status of criminal
charges, a student who makes a bomb threat shall be subject to disciplinary action by the school.
The administration may suspend and/or recommend for expulsion any student who makes a
bomb threat. The making of a bomb threat will be considered deliberately disobedient and
deliberately disorderly within the meaning of 20-A M.R.S.A. Section 1001(9) and will be
grounds for expulsion if found necessary for the peace and usefulness of the school.
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 2 of 4

NEPN/NSBA Code: EBCC
In addition, a student who is found after hearing by the Board of Directors to have brought a
bomb to school shall be expelled from school for at least one year in accordance with 20-A
M.R.S.A. Section 1001(9-A) and Policy JICIA, except that the Superintendent may modify the
requirement for expulsion based on individual circumstances.
A student who has been identified through the IEP process as having a disability and whose
conduct in violation of this policy is related to the disability shall be disciplined as provided in
Policy JKF.
F. Aiding Other Students in Making Bomb Threats
A student who knowingly encourages, causes, aids or assists another student in making or
communicating a bomb threat shall be subject to the disciplinary consequences described in
Section E of this policy.
G. Failure to Report a Bomb Threat
A student who fails to report information or knowledge of a bomb threat or the existence of a
bomb or other destructive device in a school building or on school property may be subject to
disciplinary consequences, which may include suspension and/or expulsion.
H. Staff Disciplinary Consequences
A school system employee who makes or communicates a bomb threat will be reported to
appropriate law enforcement authorities and will be subject to disciplinary action up to and
including termination of employment. Disciplinary action taken shall be consistent with
collective bargaining agreements, other employment agreements and Board policies.
A school system employee who fails to report information or knowledge of a bomb threat or the
existence of a bomb on school premises will be subject to discipline up to and including
termination of employment.
I. Civil Liability
The school unit reserves the right to bring suit against any individual responsible for a violation
of this policy and to seek restitution and other damages as permitted by law.
J. Lost Instructional Time
Instructional time lost as a result of a bomb threat will be rescheduled at the earliest practicable
opportunity, as determined by the Superintendent in consultation with the Board of Directors.
Time lost may be rescheduled on a weekend or vacation day, or after what would normally be
the last day of the school year, except on days when schools must be closed as required by law.
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 3 of 4

NEPN/NSBA Code: EBCC
K. Notification Through Student Handbook
All student handbooks shall address the school unit's bomb threat policy and procedures and
explain the educational consequences of bomb threats. In addition, student handbooks shall
notify students and parents that bomb threats violate Board policy and civil and criminal law.
Legal References: 18 U.S.C. Section 921; 8921
17-A M.R.S.A. Section 210
20-A M.R.S.A. Section 263; 1001(9); 1001(9-A); 1001(17); 1001(18)
Ch. 125 § 10.06 (Me. Dept. of Ed. Rules)
Cross References: EBCA - Comprehensive Health and Safety and Emergency Management Plan
JKD - Suspension of Students
JKE - Expulsion of Students
JKF - Suspension/Expulsion of Students with Disabilities
JICIA - Weapons, Violence and School Safety Student Code of Conduct
Adopted: June 24, 2009
Reviewed: December 14, 2011
Revised: January 25, 2017
Reviewed: October 25, 2023
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 4 of 4