SOURCE: https://www.rsu5.org/fs/resource-manager/view/a6484428-c985-452c-9e68-ff43df92c65c
SECTION: /board-of-directors-and-policies/adopted-policies-and-procedures
TITLE: GCSA-R-Employee Computer and Internet Use Rules.pdf
TYPE: Finalsite-PDF
============================================================

NEPN/NSBA Code: GCSA-R
EMPLOYEE COMPUTER AND INTERNET USE RULES
These rules implement Board policy GCSA (Employee Computer and Internet Use).
Each employee is responsible for his/her actions and activities involving school unit
computers, networks, and Internet services, and for his/her computer files,
passwords, and accounts. These rules provide general guidance concerning the use
of the school unit’s computers and examples of prohibited uses. The rules do not
attempt to describe every possible prohibited activity by employees. Employees who
have questions about whether a particular activity or use is prohibited are encouraged
to contact a building administrator or the Technology Director.
A. Consequences for Violation of Computer Use Policy and Rules
Failure to comply with Board policy GCSA, these rules, and/or other
procedures or rules governing computer use may result in disciplinary
action, up to and including termination. Illegal use of the school
unit’s computers will also result in referral to law enforcement.
B. Access to School Computers, Networks, and Internet Services
The level of employee access to school unit computers, networks, and
Internet services is based upon specific job requirements and needs.
Unauthorized access to secure areas of the school unit’s computers
and networks is strictly prohibited.
C. Acceptable Use
RSU No. 5 School Department computers, networks, and Internet
services are provided to employees for administrative, educational,
communication, and research purposes consistent with the school
unit’s educational mission, curriculum, and instructional goals. All
Board policies, school rules, and expectations for professional
conduct and communication apply when employees are using the
school unit’s computers, networks, and Internet services.
D. Personal Use
School unit computers, network, and Internet services are provided
for purposes related to school programs and operations, and
performance of their job responsibilities. Incidental personal use of
school computers is permitted as long as such use: 1) does not
interfere with the employee’s job responsibilities and performance; 2)
does not interfere with system operations or other system users; and
3) does not violate this policy and the accompanying rules, or any
other Board policy, procedure, or school rules. “Incidental personal
use” is defined as use by an individual employee for occasional
personal communications.
RSU No 5 School Department
Page 1 of 4

NEPN/NSBA Code: GCSA-R
E. Prohibited Uses
Examples of unacceptable uses which are expressly prohibited
include, but are not limited to, the following:
1. Any use that is illegal or which violates other Board policies,
procedures, or school rules, including harassing,
discriminatory or threatening communications and behavior,
violations of copyright laws, etc.; The school unit assumes no
responsibility for illegal activities of employees while using
school computers.
2. Any use involving materials that are obscene, pornographic,
sexually explicit or sexually suggestive;
3. Any inappropriate communications with students or minors;
4. Any use for private financial gain, or commercial, advertising,
or solicitation purposes;
5. Any use as a forum for communicating by email or any other
medium with other school users or outside parties to solicit,
proselytize, advocate or communicate the views of an
individual or non-school-sponsored organization; to solicit
membership in or support of any non-school-sponsored
organization; or to raise funds for any non-school-sponsored
purpose, whether profit or not-for-profit. No employee shall
knowingly provide school e-mail addresses to outside parties
whose intent is to communicate with school employees,
students, and/or their families for non-school purposes.
Employees who are uncertain as to whether particular
activities are acceptable should seek further guidance from the
building principal or other appropriate administrator.
6. Any communication that represents personal views as those of
the school unit or that could be misinterpreted as such;
7. Downloading or loading software or applications without
permission from the system administrator. Unauthorized
copying of software is illegal and may subject the copier to
substantial civil and criminal penalties. The school unit
assumes no responsibility for illegal software copying by
employees.
RSU No 5 School Department
Page 2 of 4

NEPN/NSBA Code: GCSA-R
8. Sending mass emails to school users or outside parties for
school or non-school purposes without the permission of the
Technology Director or building administrator.
9. Any malicious use or disruption of the school unit’s
computers, networks, and Internet services; any breach of
security features; or misuse of computer passwords or
accounts (the employee’s or those of other users);
10. Any misuse or damage to the school unit’s computer
equipment, including opening or forwarding email
attachments (executable files) from unknown sources and/or
that may contain viruses;
11. Any attempt to access unauthorized sites or any attempt to
disable or circumvent the school unit’s filtering/blocking
technology;
12. Failing to report a breach of computer security to the system
administrator;
13. Using school computers, networks, and Internet services after
such access has been denied or revoked; and
14. Any attempt to delete, erase, or otherwise conceal any
information stored on a school computer that violates these
rules or other Board policies or school rules, or refusing to
return computer equipment issued to the employee upon
request.
F. No Expectation of Privacy
RSU No. 5 computers remain under the control, custody, and
supervision of the school unit at all times. The school unit reserves the
right to monitor all computer and Internet activity by employees and
other system users. Employees have no expectation of privacy in their
use of school computers, including email messages and stored files,
and Internet access logs.
G. Disclosure of Confidential Information
Employees are expected to use appropriate judgment and caution in
communications concerning students and staff to ensure that
personally identifiable information remains confidential.
RSU No 5 School Department
Page 3 of 4

NEPN/NSBA Code: GCSA-R
H. Employee/Volunteer Responsibility to Supervise Student
Computer Use
Employees and volunteers who use school computers with students for
instructional purposes have a duty of care to supervise such use.
Teachers, staff members, and volunteers are expected to be familiar
with the school unit’s policies and rules concerning student computer
and Internet use and to enforce them. When, in the course of their
duties, employees or volunteers become aware of a student violation,
they are expected to stop the activity and inform the building principal.
I. Compensation for Losses, Costs and/or Damages
The employee is responsible for compensating the school unit for any
losses, costs, or damages incurred by the school unit for violations of
Board policies and school rules while the employee is using school
unit computers, including the cost of investigating such violations.
The school unit assumes no responsibility for any unauthorized
charges or costs incurred by an employee while using school unit
computers.
Cross Reference: GCSA - Employee Computer and Internet Use
Adopted: June 9, 2010
Reviewed: April 25, 2012
Reviewed: December 13, 2017
Reviewed: January 10, 2018
RSU No 5 School Department
Page 4 of 4