SOURCE: https://www.rsu5.org/fs/resource-manager/view/ae48c59d-89c4-4516-96e0-a6cf9f6fdbce
SECTION: /board-of-directors-and-policies/adopted-policies-and-procedures
TITLE: IHBAI-Special Education Independent Evaluation Policy
TYPE: Finalsite-PDF
============================================================

NEPN/NSBA Code: IHBAI
SPECIAL EDUCATION INDEPENDENT EVALUATION POLICY
RSU No. 5 has adopted this policy regarding special education independent educational evaluations,
consistent with state and federal special education regulations.
An independent educational evaluation is an evaluation conducted by a qualified examiner who is not
employed by RSU No. 5. An independent educational evaluation at public expense means that the
school either pays for the full cost of the evaluation or ensures that the evaluation is otherwise provided
at no cost to the parent. Qualified examiners in private practice under contract with the school unit who
have not previously evaluated, instructed or provided consultation regarding a particular student are
eligible to provide an independent educational evaluation of the student.
A parent has a right to obtain an independent evaluation at public expense when they disagree with the
evaluation done by the school, as set forth below.
If a parent requests an independent educational evaluation at public expense, the school unit may ask for
the parent’s reason why he or she objects to the public school’s evaluation. However, the school unit
may not require the parent to provide an explanation and may not unreasonably delay either providing
the independent educational evaluation at public expense or denying the request and filing for a due
process hearing to defend the public school’s evaluation.
A parent is entitled to only one independent educational evaluation at public expense each time the
school conducts an evaluation with which the parent disagrees, but only if other conditions in this policy
are also met.
If RSU No. 5 refuses to provide an independent evaluation at public expense, then the school unit must
initiate a due process hearing within 30 days of receiving the request. If the hearing officer upholds the
appropriateness of the school unit’s evaluation, then the parents shall be fully responsible for the cost of
the independent evaluation. If the hearing officer concludes that the school unit’s evaluation was not
appropriate, then the school unit must pay for the cost of the independent educational evaluation.
The following criteria must be met if the school unit is going to approve an independent evaluation at
public expense. Unique circumstances may justify deviation from these criteria. If a parent or school
staff member is aware of such unique circumstances, they should inform the student's case manager or
the Director of Instructional Support immediately.
1. RSU No. 5 will provide to parents, upon request for an independent educational evaluation,
information about where an independent evaluation may be obtained, and the criteria set forth in this
policy for obtaining an independent evaluation at public expense.
2. For an independent educational evaluation to be funded at public expense, it must meet the
following conditions:
A. The parents must be in disagreement with a school-ordered evaluation;
B. The contested school evaluation is inappropriate in the opinion of the Director of
Instructional Support;
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 1 of 3

NEPN/NSBA Code: IHBAI
C. The proposed independent evaluator is appropriately qualified professional to conduct the
type of evaluation being considered;
D. The person or agency completing the independent evaluation submits a written report that
conforms to all the requirements for written evaluations set forth in Maine special education
regulations, currently found at MUSER V;
E. A complete copy of the independent evaluation has been provided to RSU No. 5 before
payment;
F. The evaluator has reviewed relevant educational records as part of the evaluation.
G. Unless otherwise determined by the members of the child’s IEP Team, the evaluator has
either: a) observed the child in one or more educational settings; or b) made at least one
contact with the child’s general education teacher for the purpose of determining how the
student is progressing in the general curriculum. Evaluators are encouraged to make
additional contacts with other involved general and special education teachers and related
service providers.
H. The evaluator is permitted to directly communicate and share information with members of
the IEP Team, the Director of Instructional Support, and the Director’s designees. The
evaluator must also release the assessments and results, including any parent and teacher
questionnaires, to members of the IEP Team, the Director of Instructional Support, and the
Director’s designees.
I. RSU No. 5 shall be entitled to inspect and obtain copies of the evaluator’s records, including
any records created by third parties. However, those records will not be deemed accessible
to any school personnel other than the evaluator, unless and until the School Department
exercises its right to inspect or obtain copies of those records from the evaluator.
3. The Director of Instructional Support will respond within 30 days of receipt of a request for an
independent evaluation at public expense. In the event that the Director is denying the request, the
Director must also file for a due process hearing prior to the conclusion of that same 30-day time period.
4. A parent cannot request an independent evaluation at public expense in response to a school
evaluation that is more than two years old. When the parent requests an independent evaluation at
public expense in an assessment area that has not been evaluated by the school, the RSU No.5 shall
notify the parent that it cannot approve or deny such a request until after the school has had the
opportunity to complete a school-ordered evaluation in the area requested. The Director of Instructional
Support should refer the question of additional school-ordered evaluations in the areas of concern to the
IEP Team.
5. A qualified examiner is permitted to observe a child at school or at a potential educational
placement when the qualified examiner is not employed by the school and is conducting an independent
educational evaluation at the request of the parent, at times and durations as the school would permit a
qualified examiner that is employed by the school.
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 2 of 3

NEPN/NSBA Code: IHBAI
6. If a parent provides RSU No. 5 with a copy of an independent educational evaluation, the IEP
team will consider the evaluation whether or not that evaluation is provided at public expense. RSU No.
5 will not accept or rely on any independent educational evaluation that does not meet state regulatory
criteria for evaluations.
Legal Reference: Maine Unified Special Education Regulations, Maine Unified Special Education
Regulations (“MUSER”) Ch. 101, § V (2015); 34 C.F.R. § 300.502 (2006)
Adopted: June 24, 2009
Reviewed: April 25, 2012
Revised: April 25, 2018
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 3 of 3