SOURCE: https://www.rsu5.org/fs/resource-manager/view/b61dbb07-5d68-44f9-9af5-01d5f2429919
SECTION: /board-of-directors-and-policies/adopted-policies-and-procedures
TITLE: IHBGA-Home Schooling - Participation in School Programs.pdf
TYPE: Finalsite-PDF
============================================================

NEPN/NSBA Code: IHBGA
HOME SCHOOLING—PARTICIPATION IN SCHOOL PROGRAMS
The School Board acknowledges the provisions for equivalent instruction under Maine
law. The Board further recognizes the Legislature’s statement “that the term ‘equivalent’
is intended to mean meeting state standards for alternate or other instruction and is not
intended to mean the same as the education delivered in the public school system.”
In addition, it is the intention of the Board to, “cooperate in the home instruction of any
child who resides in the school administrative unit to the degree that the level of
cooperation does not interfere with the responsibilities to the students enrolled in RSU
No. 5’s regular programs.” Furthermore, participation of students in such school
programs shall be limited to home-schooled students whose home instruction programs
are in compliance with applicable Maine law and Department of Education regulations.
In order to maintain an efficient and orderly school program, the Board directs the
Superintendent/designee to develop procedures, as appropriate, regarding the availability
of school system resources and services to home-schooled students who would otherwise
be eligible to attend school in RSU No. 5. The procedures shall be in accord with the
following provisions.
I. PROVISION OF INFORMATION
At the request of the student or the student’s parent/guardian, this school unit shall
make available to home-schooled students, in a form determined by the school,
information regarding access to public school activities and attendance at the
school unit’s schools. This information must include:
A. Requirements regarding initial health and developmental screening for
motor skills, vision, hearing, and immunization; and
B. Criteria for participation of home-schooled students in curricular, co-
curricular, and extracurricular activities.
II. PERMITTED PARTICIPATION
A. Participation in Regular Classes. Home instruction students may enroll
in specific, day-school classes provided that the student’s attendance is
regular, the class is deemed to be age and grade appropriate, and all
prerequisite course requirements are met. In addition, the following shall
also apply.
1. The student or the student’s parent/guardian, on the student’s
behalf, shall apply in writing to and receive written approval from
the Superintendent/designee. Approval may not be unreasonably
withheld.
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 1 of 7

NEPN/NSBA Code: IHBGA
2. The student shall demonstrate prior satisfactory academic
achievement consistent with school unit policy and procedures
applicable to all students.
3. The student shall comply with behavioral, disciplinary, attendance
and other classroom rules applicable to all students. If a student
fails to comply, the school may withhold credit or terminate the
student’s participation.
4. Transportation must be provided by the parent/guardian or student.
However, the student may use the same transportation as all other
students in the school unit as long as additional expenses are not
incurred and vehicle capacity is not exceeded.
5. The student shall complete all assignments and tests as required of
all students in the same class.
B. Course Auditing. Home instruction students may audit a course(s)
provided the following conditions have been met.
1. The student or the student’s parent/guardian, on behalf of the
student, shall apply in writing to and receive written approval from
the Superintendent/designee to audit a specific course or courses.
Participation may not be unreasonably withheld.
2. The student agrees to meet established behavioral, disciplinary,
attendance and other classroom rules applicable to all students. If
a student fails to comply, the school may terminate participation.
III. SPECIAL EDUCATION SERVICES
Special Education Services will be available to eligible special education students
in accordance with applicable federal and state laws and regulations.
IV. ADMISSION TO REGULAR PROGRAM/PLACEMENT
A student who has been receiving home-school instruction and who seeks
admission to the regular school program will be placed in a grade commensurate
with the level of the student’s academic achievement. Placement must be guided
by the following.
A. For students who transfer into school from an educational program that is
not required to meet the standards of the system of Learning Results, the
principal of the receiving school shall determine the value of the student’s
prior educational experience toward meeting these standards.
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 2 of 7

NEPN/NSBA Code: IHBGA
B. Appropriate school staff may make recommendations concerning
placement based on, but not limited to, factors such as the student’s
completed curricula and record of achievement, conferences with the
student’s parent/guardian, and administration of tests.
C. The final grade placement decision shall be made by the principal. The
principal’s decision may be appealed to the Superintendent, whose
decision shall be final.
V. RE-ADMISSION TO THE SCHOOL PROGRAM
Placement of home-schooled students who wish to be readmitted to the school
program will be determined by the principal who shall consult with members of
the professional staff to the extent appropriate and, as deemed necessary, to make
a reasonable determination that the requisite academic standards have been met,
and collect from parents actual samples of coursework (e.g., homework, papers,
examinations). The principal may also direct that a test or tests be administered to
help determine the student’s progress toward meeting the content standards of the
Learning Results for the purpose of determining an appropriate grade level. The
decision of the principal may be appealed to the Superintendent.
VI. USE OF SCHOOL TEXTBOOKS AND LIBRARY BOOKS
Subject to availability, a student receiving home instruction may use school
textbooks, if the number of particular copies are sufficient, and library books
owned by the school unit, subject to the following conditions.
A. The use does not disrupt regular student, staff or special program
functions.
B. The student’s sign-out period for a library book is the same as that
applicable to regularly enrolled students.
C. The student may sign out a textbook for a period not to exceed one school
year.
D. The parent/guardian and student agree to reimburse the school unit for
lost, unreturned or damaged library books and textbooks and for
consumable supplies used.
VII. USE OF SCHOOL FACILITIES AND EQUIPMENT
A student receiving home-school instruction may use public school facilities and
equipment on the same basis as regularly enrolled students if the following
conditions are met.
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 3 of 7

NEPN/NSBA Code: IHBGA
A. The use does not disrupt regular school activities.
B. The use is approved by the school principal in accordance with established
school policy.
C. The use does not create additional expense to the school unit.
D. The use is directly related to the student’s academic program.
E. The use of potentially hazardous areas, such as shops, laboratories, and
gymnasiums, is supervised by a qualified employee of the school unit,
approved and assigned by the Superintendent.
VIII. MAINE EDUCATIONAL ASSESSMENT
If a parent of a student in an equivalent instruction program requests to have the
student participate in the Maine Educational Assessment (MEA), such request
must be granted. Participation in such examinations must be in compliance with
all rules and procedures governing testing conditions in the school unit.
IX. ACADEMIC CREDIT
A student receiving home-school instruction must receive academic credit subject
to the following requirements.
A. Academic credit for individual courses must be awarded if the student
meets required academic standards applicable to all students enrolled in
the same course.
B. Academic credit must be awarded for successful completion of alternative
instruction opportunities sponsored by the school and available to all
students.
X. HIGH SCHOOL COURSE CREDITS AND DIPLOMA ELIGIBILITY
The following standards govern the awarding of course credits and a graduation
diploma to a student receiving home-school instruction who seeks admission or
readmission to the high school.
A. A student shall earn high school credits for satisfactory completion of
courses in the high school pursuant to 20-A MRSA § 5021(2)(A).
B. A student may earn credit for course work completed through home-
school instruction if the principal determines, both in advance and upon
completion of the course, that the course satisfies the requirements for
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 4 of 7

NEPN/NSBA Code: IHBGA
awarding the credit. The principal may direct that the student undergo a
test or tests to assist in making a determination relative to the awarding of
credit.
C. Requests for transfer credit for equivalent instruction completed at non-
approved private schools, at private schools that elect not to meet
requirements under 20-A MRSA § 2901, or through other equivalent
instruction programs must be evaluated on the merits of the documentation
provided. The principal and guidance staff shall conduct these evaluations
on request made by the student or the student’s parent/guardian. The
principal may direct that the student undergo a test or tests to assist in
making a determination relative to the awarding of credit.
D. For students who transfer into a secondary school from another state or an
educational program that is not required to meet the standards of the
system of Learning Results, the principal of the receiving school shall
determine the value of the prior educational experience toward meeting
the standards through the local assessment system.
E Awarding of a high school diploma by the local school is conditioned
upon the student’s demonstration of having satisfied all requirements set
by the State and all specific course credit and other requirements
established by the Board. The Board may establish resident credit
requirements as a precondition for the awarding of a local school unit
diploma.
XI. PARTICIPATION IN CO-CURRICULAR ACTIVITIES
Students receiving home-school instruction may participate in co-curricular
activities such as field trips, assemblies, and academically related fairs provided:
A. Prior written permission is obtained from both the parent/guardian and the
principal; and
B. The student has agreed to meet established behavioral, disciplinary,
attendance, and other rules applicable to all students.
XII. PARTICIPATION IN EXTRACURRICULAR ACTIVITIES
Students receiving home-school instruction are eligible to try out for
extracurricular activities sponsored by the school unit provided the student applies
in writing and the following requirements are satisfied.
A. The student agrees to abide by equivalent rules of participation as are
applicable to regularly enrolled students participating in the activity and
provides evidence that the rules of participation are being met.
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 5 of 7

NEPN/NSBA Code: IHBGA
B. The student complies with the same physical examination, immunization,
insurance, age, and semester eligibility requirements as regularly enrolled
students participating in the activity. All required documentation must be
made available upon request by the school unit. The school principal is
authorized to collect from the student’s parent/guardian actual samples of
coursework (e.g., homework, examinations, etc.) as he/she deems
necessary in order to make the determination that the necessary academic
standards have been met.
C. The student meets equivalent academic standards as those established for
regularly enrolled students participating in the activity and provides
evidence that the academic standards are being met.
D. The student abides by the same transportation policy as regularly enrolled
students participating in the activity.
XIII. STANDARDS FOR PARTICIPATION WHEN TUITION PAYMENT TO
ANOTHER UNIT IS REQUIRED
If and when the school unit does not provide academic instruction for specific
grade levels, the following applies for students enrolled in an approved program
of equivalent instruction.
A. Class participation. The home-schooled student or the student’s
parent/guardian shall request authorization from the resident local school
unit to apply to another school unit for permission to participate in classes
or activities in that other school unit.
B. Tuition payment. Tuition payments for home-schooled student
participation in a local school unit, including attendance at an applied
technology center or an applied technology region other than the
applicant’s resident district is the responsibility of the home-schooled
student, the student’s parent/guardian, or the student’s resident school
administrative unit, in accordance with school unit policy. Participation
may not be unreasonably withheld.
C. Participation eligibility. A tuitioned, home-schooled student is subject to
the rules relating to eligibility for participation in co-curricular or
extracurricular activities as may apply at the receiving school unit.
D. Interscholastic activities. A tuitioned, home-schooled student attending
classes in more than one receiving school unit is not eligible for
participation in interscholastic activities at any local school unit.
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 6 of 7

NEPN/NSBA Code: IHBGA
XIV. APPEALS
Appeals from administration and application of the Board policy are heard by the
Board, whose decision is final and binding. Appeals that question the Board
policy compliance with legal requirements must be made to the Commissioner,
whose decision is final and binding.
Legal Reference: 20-A MRSA §§ 5001-A(3), 5021-5025
Ch. 127, 130 (Me. Dept. of Ed. Rules)
Cross Reference: IHBG – Home Schooling
IHBGB – Special Education Services for Students in Private
Schools or Home Schooling
Adopted: June 24, 2009
Revised: November 28, 2012
Reviewed: March 28, 2018
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 7 of 7