SOURCE: https://www.rsu5.org/fs/resource-manager/view/60a9010d-a07a-4a85-a8bb-b5a5c9245e4d
SECTION: /board-of-directors-and-policies/adopted-policies-and-procedures
TITLE: IJJ-Instructional and Library-Media Materials Selection.pdf
TYPE: Finalsite-PDF
============================================================

NEPN/NSBA Code: IJJ
INSTRUCTIONAL AND LIBRARY-MEDIA MATERIALS SELECTION
The RSU No. 5 Board of Directors is legally responsible for all matters relating to the operation
of the schools, including the provision of instructional materials and maintenance of library-
media resources that support the school system’s curriculum.
While the Board retains its authority to approve the selection of instructional materials, it
recognizes the educational expertise of its professional staff and the need for such staff to be
involved in the recommendation of instructional materials. The Board delegates responsibility
for the selection of instructional materials and library-media resources to the professionally
trained personnel employed by the school system, subject to the criteria and procedures for
selection and the Board’s policy on challenged materials as described below.
With the assistance of professional staff, the Superintendent shall establish a system for the
selection of instructional materials, including procedures to establish an orderly process for the
review and recommendation of instructional materials. The Superintendent will be responsible
for overseeing the purchase of instructional materials within budgetary parameters set by the
Board. The Board expects the Superintendent to report on progress made in aligning
instructional materials with curriculum development and evaluation in support of the content
standards contained in Maine’s system of Learning Results.
Each school shall maintain a library-media program that includes books and other print
materials, multimedia materials, online Internet resources and information technology that
support the curriculum. A certified library-media specialist will be responsible for overseeing the
school system's library-media program, under the supervision of the Superintendent. As with
instructional materials, the Board delegates responsibility for selection of library-media materials
and technology and Internet resources to the school system’s professionally trained staff, subject
to the criteria and procedures for selection and the Board’s policy on challenged materials
described below.
Definitions
“Instructional materials” include textbooks and other print materials, software and
other electronic materials, online/Internet resources (including access), and supplies and
other materials to support instruction in subject areas and implementation of the system
of Learning Results.
“Library-media resources” include books, print materials, online/Internet resources
(including access), multimedia materials and information technology that, as part of the
library-media program, support the school system’s curriculum.
Objectives of Selection
The Board recognizes that it is the primary objective of instructional materials to
implement and support the curriculum, and of library-media resources to extend support
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 1 of 5

NEPN/NSBA Code: IJJ
and enrich the educational programs and curriculum of the schools. Quality instructional
materials and library-media resources are essential to student learning. In preparing
students to meet the content standards of the Learning Results, in supporting the
achievement of the school unit’s educational goals and objectives, and in providing
enrichment opportunities that expand students’ interests and contribute to a desire for
lifelong learning, it is the responsibility of the instructional program and the library-
media centers of the schools to provide a wide range of materials on all levels of
difficulty, with diversity of appeal and the presentation of different points of view.
Criteria for Selection
Instructional and library-media materials selected should:
A. Support achievement of the content standards of the Learning Results;
B. Support the goals and objectives of the school system’s educational programs;
C. Enrich and support the curriculum;
D. Take into consideration the varied interests, abilities, and maturity levels of the
students served;
E. Foster global awareness; understanding, respect and appreciation for cultural
diversity and varied opinions;
F. Give comprehensive, accurate and balanced representation to minorities and
women in history, science, leadership and the arts and acknowledge the
contributions of ethnic, religious and cultural groups to our American heritage;
G. Present a balance of opposing sides of controversial issues to enable students to
develop a capability for critical analysis;
H. Provide and support factual knowledge, literary appreciation, aesthetic values and
ethical standards;
I. Provide a background of information that will enable students to make intelligent
decisions in their daily lives; and
J. Respect the constraints of the school unit’s budget.
Other factors that should be considered are accuracy and currency of material;
importance of the subject matter; scholarship; quality of writing and production; and
reputation and significance of the author, artist or composer.
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 2 of 5

NEPN/NSBA Code: IJJ
In evaluating software, multimedia materials and online/Internet resources, additional
factors that should be considered include purpose for use; content; format (degree of
interactivity or student involvement); appropriate use of graphics, sound and animation;
feedback provided; and ease of use.
Procedures for Selection
Meeting the needs of the individual schools, based on knowledge of the curriculum and
the existing collections of instructional and library-media materials, shall be the highest
priority. Basic learning materials, i.e., those that are the predominant instructional
materials used by most members of the class, are used for a significant portion of the
course or receive major emphasis during a course, or are essential to student achievement
of content standards of the Learning Results are to take priority in the selection process.
Before recommending materials for purchase, professional staff should evaluate the
existing collection, consulting reputable, unbiased, professionally prepared selection aids
and specialists from all departments and/or all grade levels.
Social studies and science textbooks should not be older than five years unless up-to-date
supplemental instructional materials are also available.
Whenever possible, purchase of print or non-print materials and multimedia, Internet and
technology resources shall be made only after personal evaluation by the library media
specialist and/or other appropriate professional staff. Reviewing aids may be used in lieu
of personal evaluation.
Multiple copies of outstanding and much-in-demand materials should be purchased as
needed. Worn or missing standard items should be replaced periodically. Out-of-date or
no-longer-useful materials should be withdrawn from the collection/circulation.
Donated Materials
Gift materials are to be evaluated by the same criteria as purchased materials and are to
be accepted or rejected by those criteria and in accordance with Board policy on gifts and
donations.
Parental Authority
A student’s parent/guardian may inspect, upon request, any instructional material used as
part of the curriculum. The Superintendent will be responsible for developing and
implementing procedures for providing access to instructional material within a
reasonable time after such a request is made.
The Board recognizes that the final authority as to what materials an individual student
will be exposed rests with that student’s parents or guardians. However, at no time will
the wishes of one child’s parents to restrict his/her reading or viewing of a particular item
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 3 of 5

NEPN/NSBA Code: IJJ
infringe on other parents’ rights to permit their children to read or view the same
material.
Library-media center materials will not be removed from the collection because of
criticism except in accordance with Board policy.
Challenged Materials
Despite the care taken to select materials for student and teacher use and the
qualifications of the persons who select the materials, the Board recognizes that
objections may be raised occasionally by students, parents, school staff or community
members.
In the event a complaint is made, the following procedures will apply:
A. The complaint shall be heard first by the person providing the materials in
question.
B. If the complaint is not resolved, the complainant shall be referred to the building
Principal and requested to fill out the “Instructional and Library-Media Materials
Challenge Form.” A copy of the form will be forwarded to the Superintendent.
C. The Superintendent shall appoint a committee composed of the following persons
to review the complaint: one Principal at the appropriate grade level; one
librarian/media specialist; one classroom teacher; one community member.
D. The review committee shall: read and examine the materials referred to them;
check general acceptance of materials by reading reviews; weigh values and faults
against each other and form opinions based on the material as a whole and not on
passages or portions pulled out of context; meet to discuss the material and to
prepare a written report on it.
E. The report of the committee shall be forwarded to the Superintendent who will
inform the complainant of the results.
F. No materials shall be removed from use until the review committee has made a
final decision.
G. The review committee’s decision may be appealed to the Board. The Board may
set aside a portion of a regular meeting or call a special meeting for the purpose of
receiving testimony from representatives of the various points of view. The
material in question shall be:
1. Reviewed objectively and in its full content;
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 4 of 5

NEPN/NSBA Code: IJJ
2. Evaluated in terms of the needs and interest of students, school,
curriculum and community;
3. Considered in the light of differing opinions; and
4. Reviewed in light of the criteria for initial selection and purpose as
provided herein.
The Board will announce its decision in writing not later than the conclusion of the next regular
meeting of the Board following its receipt of said testimony.
Legal Reference: 20-A MRSA §§ 1001 (10-A); 1055 (4); 4002
Ch. 125 §§ 9.01, 9.03 (Me. Dept. of Ed. Rules)
P.L. 107-110 § 1061 (No Child Left Behind Act)
Cross Reference: IJJ-E – Instructional and Library-Media Materials Challenge Form
Adopted: July 8, 2009
Revised: October 28, 2009
Reviewed: December 14, 2011
Reviewed: October 25, 2017
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 5 of 5