SOURCE: https://www.rsu5.org/fs/resource-manager/view/a6729c02-0486-4a11-a73c-299a8fe4cfcc
SECTION: /board-of-directors-and-policies/adopted-policies-and-procedures
TITLE: IJNDB-R Student Technology, Internet Use, and Internet Safety Rules
TYPE: Finalsite-PDF
============================================================

NEPN/NSBA Code: IJNDB-R
STUDENT TECHNOLOGY, INTERNET USE, AND INTERNET SAFETY RULES
These rules accompany Board policy IJNDB (Student Technology, Internet Use and Internet
Safety). Each student is responsible for his/her actions and activities involving school unit
computers, laptops, or tablets issued to students, networks, and Internet services, and for his/her
computer files, passwords, and accounts.
These rules provide general guidance concerning the use of the school unit’s electronic devices
and examples of prohibited uses. The rules do not attempt to describe every possible prohibited
activity by students. Students, parents, and school staff who have questions about whether a
particular activity is prohibited are encouraged to contact the building principal or the
Technology Director.
A. Acceptable Use
The school unit’s electronic devices, networks, and Internet services are provided
for educational purposes and research consistent with the school unit’s
educational mission, curriculum, and instructional goals. Incidental personal use
is acceptable given that it does not interfere with educational activities.
All Board policies, school rules, and expectations concerning student conduct and
communications apply when students are using devices, whether the use is on or
off school property.
Students are also expected to comply with all specific instructions from school
administrators, school staff or volunteers when using the school unit’s devices.
B. Consequences for Violation of Electronic Devices Use Policy and Rules
Compliance with the school unit’s policies and rules concerning technology use is
mandatory. Students who violate these policies and rules may, after having been
given the opportunity to respond to an alleged violation, have their device
privileges limited, suspended, or revoked. Such violations may also result in
disciplinary action, referral to law enforcement, and or legal action.
The building principal shall have final authority to decide whether a student’s
privileges will be limited, suspended or revoked based upon the circumstances of
the particular case, the student’s prior disciplinary record, and any other relevant
factors.
C. Prohibited Uses
Examples of unacceptable use of school unit electronic devices that are expressly
prohibited include, but are not limited to, the following:
1. Accessing or Posting Inappropriate Materials – Accessing, submitting,
posting, publishing, forwarding, downloading, scanning or displaying
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 1 of 4

NEPN/NSBA Code: IJNDB-R
defamatory, abusive, obscene, vulgar, sexually explicit, sexually
suggestive, threatening, discriminatory, harassing and/or illegal materials
or engaging in “cyber bullying;”
2. Illegal Activities – Using the school unit’s electronic devices, networks,
and Internet services for any illegal activity or in violation of any Board
policy or school rules. The school unit assumes no responsibility for
illegal activities of students while using school devices;
3. Violating Copyrights – Copying, downloading or sharing any type of
copyrighted materials (including music or films) without the owner’s
permission (see Board policy/procedure EGAD – Copyright Compliance).
The school unit assumes no responsibility for copyright violations by
students;
4. Copying and Downloading Software – Copying or downloading
software without the express authorization of the Director of Technology.
Unauthorized copying of software is illegal and may subject the copier to
substantial civil and criminal penalties. The school unit assumes no
responsibility for illegal software copying by students;
5. Plagiarism – Representing as one’s own work any materials obtained on
the Internet (such as term papers, articles, music, etc.). When Internet
sources are used in student work, the author, publisher, and website must
be identified;
6. Misuse of Passwords/Unauthorized Access – Sharing passwords, using
other users’ passwords, and accessing or using other users’ accounts;
7. Malicious Use/Vandalism – Any malicious use, disruption or harm to the
school unit’s devices, networks, and Internet services, including but not
limited to hacking activities and creation/uploading of technology viruses;
and
8. Unauthorized Access to Blogs/Chat Rooms/Social Networking Sites –
Accessing blogs, chat rooms or social networking sites to which student
access is prohibited.
D. No Expectation of Privacy
RSU No. 5 and MLTI owned devices remain under the control, custody, and
supervision of the school unit at all times. Students have no expectation of
privacy in their use of school devices, including email, stored files, and Internet
access logs.
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 2 of 4

NEPN/NSBA Code: IJNDB-R
E. Compensation for Losses, Costs, and/or Damages
The student and his/her parents are responsible for compensating the school unit
for any losses, costs, or damages incurred by the school unit for violations of
Board policies and rules while the student is using school unit devices,
including the cost of investigating such violations. The school unit assumes no
responsibility for any unauthorized charges or costs incurred by a student while
using school unit devices.
F. Student Security
A student is not allowed to reveal his/her full name, address or telephone number,
social security number, or other personal information on the Internet without prior
permission from a teacher. Students should never agree to meet people they have
contacted through the Internet without parental permission. Students should
inform their teacher if they access information or messages that are dangerous,
inappropriate, or make them uncomfortable in any way.
G. System Security
The security of the school unit’s devices, networks, and Internet services is a high
priority. Any student who identifies a security problem must notify his/her
teacher immediately. The student shall not demonstrate the problem to others or
access unauthorized material. Any user who attempts to bypass system security,
causes a breach of system security, or fails to report a system security problem
shall be subject to disciplinary and/or legal action in addition to having his/her
device privileges limited, suspended, or revoked.
H. Additional Rules for Laptops and Tablets Issued to Students
1. Laptops and tablets are loaned to students as an educational tool and are
only authorized for use in completing school assignments unless
permission is given to a student by a teacher or parent to use the device for
personal reasons.
2. Before a laptop or tablet is issued to a student, the student must sign the
school’s “acceptable use” agreement and parents must attend an
informational meeting. Attendance will be documented by means of a
“sign in” sheet. The meeting will orient parents to the goals and workings
of the laptop program, expectations for care of school-issued laptops,
Internet safety, and the school unit’s rules in regard to use of this
technology.
3. Students and their parents are responsible for the proper care of laptops
and tablets at all times, whether on or off school property, including costs
associated with repairing or replacing the laptop or tablet. RSU No. 5
offers a protection program for parents to cover replacement costs and/or
repair costs for damages not covered by the warranty. Parents who choose
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 3 of 4

NEPN/NSBA Code: IJNDB-R
not to participate in the protection program should be aware that they are
responsible for any costs associated with loss, theft, or damage to a laptop
or tablet issued to their child.
4. Loss or theft of a laptop or tablet must be reported immediately to the
Principal, and, if stolen, to the local law enforcement authority as well.
5. The Board’s policy and rules concerning technology and Internet use
apply to use of laptops and tablets at any time or place, on or off school
property. Students are responsible for obeying any additional rules
concerning care of laptops and tablets issued by school staff.
6. Violation of policies or rules governing the use of computers, or any
careless use of a laptop or tablet may result in a student’s device being
confiscated and/or a student only being allowed to use the device under
the direct supervision of school staff. The student will also be subject to
disciplinary action for any violations of Board policies or school rules.
7. Parents are responsible for supervising their child’s use of the laptop or
tablet and Internet access when in use at home.
8. The laptop or tablet may only be used by the student to whom it is
assigned and by family members.
9. Laptops and tablets must be returned in acceptable working order at the
end of the school year or whenever requested by school staff.
Cross Reference: EGAD – Copyright Compliance
IJNDB – Student Technology, Internet Use, and Internet Safety
Adopted: February 24, 2010
Revised: June 13, 2012
Revised: November 20, 2013
Revised: November 14, 2018
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 4 of 4