SOURCE: https://www.rsu5.org/fs/resource-manager/view/e94e8fc5-dd80-4894-bd12-2cbec02516b8
SECTION: /board-of-directors-and-policies/adopted-policies-and-procedures
TITLE: JFABD-Admission of Homeless Students.pdf
TYPE: Finalsite-PDF
============================================================

NEPN/NSBA Code: JFABD
ADMISSION OF HOMELESS STUDENTS
The Board of Directors recognizes that homelessness alone should not be a sufficient
reason to separate students from the mainstream school environment. The RSU No. 5.
School Department will strive to ensure that homeless students are identified and
provided access to the same free and appropriate public education provided to other
students in the school system. In accordance with federal and state law and regulations,
the school unit will provide homeless students with access to the instructional
programming that supports achievement of the content standards of Maine’s system of
Learning Results and to other services for which they are eligible. Students shall not be
segregated into a separate school or program based on their status as homeless, nor shall
they be stigmatized in any way.
I. DEFINITIONS
A. “Homeless” students are those who lack a fixed, regular, and adequate
nighttime residence and include the following:
1. Children and youths who are sharing the housing of other persons
due to loss of housing, economic hardship, or a similar reason; are
living in motels, hotels, trailer parks, or camping grounds due to
the lack of alternative adequate accommodations; are living in
emergency or transitional shelters; are abandoned in hospitals; or
are awaiting foster care placement.
2. Children and youths who have a primary nighttime residence that
is a public or private place not designated for or ordinarily used as
regular sleeping accommodation for human beings.
3. Children and youths who are living in cars, parks, public spaces,
abandoned buildings, substandard housing, bus or train stations, or
similar settings.
4. Migratory children who meet one of the above-described
circumstances.
B “School of origin” means the school that the child or youth attended when
permanently housed or the school in which the child or youth was last
enrolled.
C. “Unaccompanied youth” refers to a youth not in the physical custody of a
parent or guardian (e.g., runaway and “throw away” children and youth).
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 1 of 4

NEPN/NSBA Code: JFABD
II. HOMELESS STUDENT LIAISON
A. The Superintendent shall designate an individual to act as the school unit’s
Homeless Student Liaison. The school unit shall inform school personnel,
service providers and advocates working with homeless families of the
duties of the school unit’s Homeless Student Liaison.
B. The Homeless Student Liaison will be responsible for ensuring that:
1. Homeless children and youths are identified by school personnel
and through coordination activities with other entities and
agencies;
2. Homeless children and youths enroll in and have a full and equal
opportunity to succeed in schools within the school unit;
3. Homeless families, children, and youths receive educational
services for which they are eligible, including Head Start, Even
Start, and preschool programs administered by the school unit, and
referrals to health care services, dental services, mental health
services, and other appropriate services;
4. The parents or guardians of homeless children and youths are
informed of the educational and related opportunities available to
their children and are provided with meaningful opportunities to
participate in the education of their children;
5. Public notice of the educational rights of homeless children and
youths is disseminated where such children and youths receive
services, such as schools, family shelters, and soup kitchens;
6. Enrollment disputes are mediated in accordance with law;
7. The parent or guardian of a homeless child or youth, and any
unaccompanied youth, is fully informed of all transportation
services, including transportation to the school of origin, and is
assisted in accessing transportation to the school the student will be
attending;
8. Unaccompanied youths are assisted in placement or enrollment
decisions and provided notice of the right to appeal; and
9. Children or youths who need to obtain immunizations or
immunization medical records receive assistance.
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 2 of 4

NEPN/NSBA Code: JFABD
III. ENROLLMENT/PLACEMENT
The school unit will determine, according to the best interest of the child or youth,
whether the child or youth will be enrolled in the school of origin or in the public
school that non-homeless students who live in the attendance area in which the
child is actually living are eligible to attend. In determining the best interest of
the child or youth, the school unit will, to the extent feasible, keep the child or
youth in the school of origin, unless doing so is contrary to the wishes of the
parent.
If the youth is unaccompanied by a parent or guardian, the homeless student
liaison will assist in placement and enrollment decisions, with the views of the
youth taken into consideration.
The school selected shall immediately enroll the homeless child or youth, even if
the child or youth is unable to produce records normally required for enrollment,
such as previous academic records, immunization records, evidence of residency,
or other documentation.
The school unit may require a parent or guardian of a homeless child or youth to
provide contact information.
The school unit must provide a written explanation, including a statement
regarding the right to appeal, to the parent or guardian of the homeless child or
youth if the school unit sends the child or youth to a school other than the school
of origin or other than a school requested by the parent or guardian.
In the case of an unaccompanied youth, the homeless student liaison will provide
notice of the right to appeal.
The enrolling school shall contact the school last attended by the child or youth to
obtain relevant academic and other records. If the child or youth needs to obtain
immunizations or immunization or medical records, the parent or guardian of the
homeless child or youth will be referred to the homeless student liaison for
assistance.
IV. ENROLLMENT DISPUTES
If there is a dispute concerning enrollment, the child or youth shall be
immediately enrolled in the school in which enrollment is sought, pending
resolution of the dispute. The parent or guardian will be provided, in writing,
with a written explanation of the school unit’s decision and the right to appeal the
decision.
The homeless student liaison shall ensure that an unaccompanied youth is
enrolled in school, pending resolution of a dispute.
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 3 of 4

NEPN/NSBA Code: JFABD
V. SERVICES
Homeless students shall be provided services comparable to services available to
other students in the school system including, but not limited to, transportation
services; educational services for which the student meets the eligibility criteria,
such as educational programs for disadvantaged students, students with
disabilities, gifted and talented students, and students with limited English
proficiency; vocational and technical programs; preschool programs; before and
after school-care programs; and school meals/nutrition programs.
VI. TRANSPORTATION
Homeless students are entitled to transportation to their school of origin or the
school where they are to be enrolled. If the school of origin is in another school
unit and the student is enrolled in the RSU No. 5 School Department, or if a
homeless student’s school of origin is in the RSU No. 5 School Department but he
or she is enrolled in a different school unit, the school systems will coordinate the
transportation services necessary for the student, or will share the responsibilities
and costs equally.
VII. RECORDS
Any records ordinarily kept by the school, including immunization records,
medical records, academic records, birth certificates, guardianship records, and
evaluations for special services or programs, regarding each homeless student,
shall be maintained so that records may be transferred when a student enters a
new school system. Access to records will be available to parents and students in
accordance with the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA).
Legal References: 42 U.S.C. § 11431-11435
20-A M.R.S.A. §§ 1 (13-A), 5161-5164, 261
Ch. 14 (Me. Dept. of Ed. Rules)
Maine State Plan for the Education of Homeless Children and
Youth
Adopted: July 8, 2009
Reviewed: March 24, 2010
Reviewed: January 23, 2013
Reviewed: April 25, 2018
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 4 of 4