SOURCE: https://www.rsu5.org/fs/resource-manager/view/19ffabca-9912-477f-bbca-41af932463d1
SECTION: /board-of-directors-and-policies/adopted-policies-and-procedures
TITLE: JICK-Bullying.pdf
TYPE: Finalsite-PDF
============================================================

NEPN/NSBA Code: JICK
BULLYING AND CYBERBULLYING PREVENTION IN SCHOOLS
I. Introduction
It is our goal for our schools to be a safe and secure learning environment for all students. It is the
intent of the RSU No. 5 Board to provide all students with an equitable opportunity to learn. To that
end, the Board has a significant interest in providing a safe, orderly, and respectful school
environment that is conducive to teaching and learning.
Bullying and other forms of peer mistreatment are detrimental to the school environment as well as
student learning, achievement and well-being. Peer mistreatment interferes with the mission of the
schools to educate their students and disrupts the operations of the schools. Bullying and other
forms of peer mistreatment affect not only students who are targets but also those who participate in
and witness such behavior. These behaviors must be addressed to ensure student safety and an
inclusive learning environment.
It is not the Board’s intent to prohibit students from expressing their ideas, including ideas that may
offend the sensibilities of others, or from engaging in civil debate. However, the Board does not
condone and will take action in response to conduct that interferes with students’ opportunity to
learn, the educational mission of RSU No. 5, and the operation of the schools.
II. Prohibited Behavior
The following behaviors are prohibited:
1. Bullying;
2. Cyberbullying;
3. Harassment and Sexual Harassment (as defined in board policy ACAA);
4. Retaliation against those reporting such defined behaviors; and
5. Making knowingly false accusations of bullying behavior.
Any person who engages in any of these prohibited behaviors that constitutes bullying shall be
subject to appropriate disciplinary actions.
III. Bullying and Cyberbullying Defined
“Bullying” and “cyberbullying” have the same meaning in this policy as in Maine law:
A. “Bullying” includes, but is not limited to, a written, oral or electronic expression or a
physical act or gesture or any combination thereof directed at a student or students that:
(1) Has, or a reasonable person would expect it to have, the effect of:
(a) Physically harming a student or damaging a student’s property; or
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 1 of 7

NEPN/NSBA Code: JICK
(b) Placing a student in reasonable fear of physical harm or damage to the
student’s property;
OR
(2) Interferes with the rights of a student by:
(a) Creating an intimidating or hostile educational environment for the
student; or
(b) Interfering with the student’s academic performance or ability to
participate in or benefit from the services, activities or privileges provided
by the school;
OR
(3) Is based on:
A student’s actual or perceived characteristics identified in
5 MRSA § 4602 or 4684-A (including race, color, ancestry, national origin,
sex, sexual orientation; gender identity or expression; religion; physical or
mental disability) or any other distinguishing personal characteristics (such as
socioeconomic status; age; physical appearance; weight; or family status); or is
based on a student’s association with a person with one or more of these actual
or perceived characteristics or any other distinguishing characteristics; and that
has the effect described in subparagraph (1) or (2) above.
Examples of conduct that may constitute bullying include, but are not limited to:
1. Repeated or pervasive taunting, name-calling, belittling, mocking, put-downs, or
demeaning humor;
2. Behavior that is likely to harm someone by damaging or manipulating his or her
relationships with others, including but not limited to gossip, spreading rumors, and
social exclusion;
3. Non-verbal threats and/or intimidations such as use of aggressive, menacing, or
disrespectful gestures;
4. Threats of harm to a student, to his/her possessions, or to other individuals, whether
transmitted verbally or in writing;
5. Blackmail, extortion, demands for protection money, or involuntary loans or donations;
6. Blocking access to school property or facilities;
7. Stealing or hiding books, backpacks, or other possessions;
8. Stalking; and
9. Physical contact or injury to another person or his/her property.
Note: Actions that constitute bullying under this policy may also constitute harassment as
defined in policy ACAA: Harassment and Sexual Harassment of Students.
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 2 of 7

NEPN/NSBA Code: JICK
B. “Cyberbullying” means bullying through the use of technology or any electronic
communication, including but not limited to, a transfer of signs, signals, writing, images,
sounds, data or intelligence of any nature transmitted by the use of any electronic device
including, but not limited to, a computer, telephone, cellular telephone, text messaging device
and personal digital assistant.
Examples of conduct that may constitute cyberbullying include, but are not limited to the
following actions on any electronic medium:
1. Posting slurs or rumors or displaying any defamatory, inaccurate, disparaging, violent,
abusive, profane, or sexually oriented material about a student on a website, an app, in
social media, or any other electronic platform;
2. Posting misleading or fake photographs or digital video footage of a student on websites
or creating fake websites or social networking profiles in the guise of posing as the
targeted student;
3. Impersonating or representing another student through the use of that other student’s
electronic device or account to send e-mail, text messages, instant messages (IM), phone
calls or other messages on a social media website;
4. Sending e-mail, text messages, IM, or leaving voice mail messages that are mean or
threatening, or so numerous as to bombard the target’s e-mail account, IM account, or cell
phone; and
5. Using a camera phone or digital video camera to take and/or send embarrassing or
“sexting” photographs of other students.
C. “Retaliation” means an act or gesture against a student for asserting or alleging an act of
bullying. “Retaliation” also includes knowingly falsely reporting an act of bullying.
D. “Substantiated” means that the outcomes of the investigation on the Responding Form
(JICK-E2) provide clear evidence to prove that bullying or cyberbullying, as defined in
policy, did occur.
E. “Alternative discipline” means disciplinary action other than suspension or expulsion from
school that is designed to correct and address the root causes of a student’s specific
misbehavior while retaining the student in class or school, or restorative school practices to
repair the harm done to relationships and persons from the student’s misbehavior.
IV. Application of Policy
A. This policy applies to any student, school employee, contractor, visitor or volunteer who
engages in conduct that constitutes bullying or retaliation, all of whom have the
responsibility to comply with this policy.
B. This policy applies to bullying that:
1. Takes place at school or on school grounds, meaning: a school building; property
on which a school building or facility is located; and property that is owned, leased or
used by a school for a school-sponsored activity, function, program, instruction or
training. “School grounds” also includes school-related transportation vehicles.
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 3 of 7

NEPN/NSBA Code: JICK
2. Takes place while students are being transported to or from schools or
school-sponsored events;
3. Takes place at any school-sponsored event, activity, function, program, instruction
or training; or
4. Takes place elsewhere or through the use of technology, but only if the bullying
also infringes on the rights of the student at school as set forth in this policy’s
definition of “bullying.”
V. Reporting
Refer to the Reporting Form – JICK-E1
Bullying or suspected bullying is reportable in person or in writing (including anonymously) to
school personnel.
A. School staff, coaches and advisors for extracurricular and cocurricular activities are required to
report alleged incidents of bullying to the school principal or other school personnel designated
by the superintendent. Any other adult working or volunteering in a school will be encouraged to
promptly report observed or suspected alleged incidents of bullying to the building principal or
school personnel designated by the superintendent.
B. Students who are believed to have been bullied or are aware of incidents of bullying are
strongly encouraged to report this behavior to a staff member or school administrator.
C. Parents and other adults who believe that an incident of bullying has occurred are encouraged
to report this behavior to a staff member or school administrator.
D. Acts of reprisal or retaliation against any person who reports an alleged incident of bullying
are prohibited. Any student who is determined to have knowingly falsely accused another of
bullying shall be subject to disciplinary consequences.
VI. Responding
Refer to the Responding Form – JICK-E2
The school principal or a superintendent’s designee will:
A. Within five school days, investigate and respond to allegations of bullying behavior;
B. Keep written documentation of all allegations of bullying behavior and outcomes of the
investigations, and report alleged and substantiated incidents to the superintendent;
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 4 of 7

NEPN/NSBA Code: JICK
C. Inform parent(s) or guardian(s) of the student(s) who was alleged to have bullied AND of the
student(s) who was believed to have been bullied that a report of an alleged incident of bullying
has been made;
D. Communicate to the parent(s) or guardian(s) of a student(s) who was believed to have been
bullied the measures being taken to ensure the safety of the student(s) who was believed to have
been bullied and to prevent further acts of bullying;
E. Inform parent(s) or guardian(s) of the students involved the findings of the investigation and
actions to be taken;
F. Communicate with local or state law enforcement agency if it’s believed that the pursuit of
criminal charges or a civil action under the Maine Civil Rights Act may be appropriate.
VII. Remediation
Refer to the Remediation Form – JICK-E3
The school principal or a superintendent’s designee will:
A. Identify the specific nature(s) of the incident.
B. Apply disciplinary actions, which may include but are not limited to, imposing a series of
graduated consequences that include alternative discipline. In determining the appropriate
response to students who engage in bullying behavior, school administrators should consider the
type of behaviors, the frequency and/or pattern of behaviors, and other relevant circumstances.
Alternative discipline includes, but is not limited to:
1. Meeting with the student and the student's parents/guardian;
2. Reflective activities, such as requiring the student to write an essay about the student's
misbehavior;
3. Mediation, but only when there is mutual conflict between peers, rather than one-way
negative behavior, and both parties voluntarily choose this option;
4. Counseling;
5. Anger management;
6. Health counseling or intervention;
7. Mental health counseling;
8. Participation in skills building and resolution activities, such as social-emotional cognitive
skills building, resolution circles and restorative conferencing;
9. Community service; and
10. In-school detention or suspension, which may take place during lunchtime, after school or
on weekends.
C. Remediate any substantiated incident of bullying to counter the negative impact of the bullying
and reduce the risk of future bullying incidents, which may include referring the victim,
perpetrator or other involved persons to counseling or other appropriate services.
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 5 of 7

NEPN/NSBA Code: JICK
VIII. Appeal
Notification shall be provided to parent(s), guardian(s) and students of the right to appeal a decision
of a school principal or a superintendent's designee related to taking or not taking remedial action in
accordance with this policy. The appeals procedure must be consistent with other appeals procedures
established by the school board and may include an appeal to the superintendent.
IX. Assignment of Responsibility
A. The School Board is responsible for:
1. Annually providing written versions of this policy and related procedures to students,
parent(s) and guardian(s), volunteers, administrators, teachers and school staff;
2. Posting this policy and related procedures on the school administrative unit's publicly
accessible website; and
3. Including in student handbooks a section that addresses in detail this policy and related
procedures.
B. The superintendent is responsible for:
1. Oversight, implementation, and enforcement of this policy and its procedures;
2. Designating a school principal or other school personnel to administer the policies at the
school level;
3. Developing a procedure for publicly identifying the superintendent's designee or designees
for administering the policies at the school level;
4. Ensuring that the prohibition on bullying and retaliation and the attendant consequences
apply to any student, school employee, contractor, visitor or volunteer who engages in
conduct that constitutes bullying or retaliation;
5. Ensuring that any contractor, visitor, or volunteer who engages in bullying is barred from
school grounds until the superintendent is assured that the person will comply with the
policies of the school board;
6. Ensuring that any organization affiliated with the school that authorizes or engages in
bullying or retaliation forfeits permission for that organization to operate on school grounds
or receive any other benefit of affiliation with the school;
7. Providing professional development and staff training in the best practices in prevention of
bullying and harassment and implementation of this policy;
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 6 of 7

NEPN/NSBA Code: JICK
8. Filing the RSU 5 policy that addresses bullying and cyberbullying with the Maine
Department of Education; and
9. Ensuring that substantiated incidents of bullying and cyberbullying are reported to the
Maine Department of Education on at least an annual basis.
Legal Reference: 20-A M.R.S.A. § 254 (11-A)
20-A M.R.S.A. § 1001(15), 6554
Maine Public Law, Chapter 659
Cross Reference: AC - Nondiscrimination, Equal Opportunity
ACAA - Harassment and Sexual Harassment of Students
ACAA-R - Harassment and Sexual Harassment of Students
ACAD - Hazing
AD - Educational Mission and Vision
ADAA - School System Commitment to Standards for Ethical and
Responsible Behavior
CHCAA - Student Handbooks
GCI - Professional Staff Development Opportunities
IJNDB-R - Student Technology, Internet Use, and Internet Safety Rules
JI - Student Rights and Responsibilities
JIC - Student Code of Conduct
JICC - Student Conduct on Buses
JICIA - Weapons, Violence and School Safety
JK - Student Discipline
JKD - Suspension of Students
JKE - Expulsion of Students
JRA-R - Student Education Records and Information Administrative
Procedures
KLG - Relations with Law Enforcement Authorities
Adopted: July 8, 2009
Revised: March 27, 2013
Revised: April 29, 2020
Revised: February 25, 2026
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 7 of 7