SOURCE: https://www.rsu5.org/fs/resource-manager/view/80deccbe-b59b-4f54-bfef-3b34c0958fd4
SECTION: /board-of-directors-and-policies/adopted-policies-and-procedures
TITLE: JICK-R-Bullying-Administrative Procedure.pdf
TYPE: Finalsite-PDF
============================================================

NEPN/NSBA Code: JICK-R
BULLYING AND CYBERBULLYING ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE
This procedure is intended as guidance for the school principal or superintendent’s designee to
address an alleged bullying incident. Definitions, as well as steps for reporting, responding to, and
remediating allegations of bullying, are provided.
Behavior alleged to be based on a targeted student’s actual or perceived race, color, ancestry,
national origin, sex, sexual orientation (including gender identity and expression), religion or
disability should be addressed under the Student Harassment and Sexual Harassment procedure,
ACAA-R and potentially under this procedure if appropriate.
Definitions
The following terms are defined in Maine Public law, Chapter 659 and 20-A M.R.S.A. §6554:
A. “Bullying” includes, but is not limited to, a written, oral or electronic expression or a physical
act or gesture or any combination thereof directed at a student or students that:
(1) Has, or a reasonable person would expect it to have, the effect of:
(a) Physically harming a student or damaging a student's property; or
(b) Placing a student in reasonable fear of physical harm or damage to the student's
property;
OR
(2) Interferes with the rights of a student by:
(a) Creating an intimidating or hostile educational environment for the student; or
(b) Interfering with the student's academic performance or ability to participate in or
benefit from the services, activities or privileges provided by a school;
OR
(3) Is based on a student’s actual or perceived race, color, ancestry, national origin, sex,
sexual orientation; gender identity or expression; religion; physical or mental disability; or
any other distinguishing characteristics (such as socioeconomic status; age; physical
appearance; weight; or family status); or is based on a student’s association with a person
with one or more of these actual or perceived characteristics, and that has the effect described
in subparagraph (1) or (2) above.
Note: Actions that constitute bullying under this policy may also constitute harassment as defined in
policy ACAA: Harassment and Sexual Harassment of Students.
“Bullying” includes cyberbullying.
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 1 of 4

NEPN/NSBA Code: JICK-R
B. “Cyberbullying” means bullying through the use of technology or any electronic
communication, including, but not limited to, a transfer of signs, signals, writing, images,
sounds, data or intelligence of any nature transmitted by the use of any electronic device,
including, but not limited to, a computer, telephone, cellular telephone, text messaging device
and personal digital assistant.
C. “Retaliation means” an act or gesture against a student for asserting or alleging an act of
bullying. “Retaliation” can also include knowingly false reporting of bullying.
D. “School grounds” means a school building; property on which a school building or facility is
located; and property that is owned, leased or used by a school for a school-sponsored activity,
function, program, instruction or training. “School grounds” also includes school-related
transportation vehicles.
E. “Alternative discipline” means disciplinary action other than suspension or expulsion from
school that is designed to correct and address the root causes of a student’s specific misbehavior
while retaining the student in class or school, or restorative school practices to repair the harm
done to relationships and persons from the student’s misbehavior.
Reports of Bullying
Bullying or suspected bullying is reportable in person or in writing (including anonymously) to
school personnel using the school unit’s Reporting Form (JICK-E1).
School staff, coaches and advisors for extracurricular and cocurricular activities are required to
report alleged incidents of bullying to the school principal or other school personnel designated by
the superintendent. Any other adult working or volunteering in a school will be encouraged to
promptly report observed or suspected alleged incidents of bullying to the building principal or
school personnel designated by the superintendent.
Students who are believed to have been bullied or are aware of incidents of bullying are strongly
encouraged to report this behavior to a staff member or school administrator.
Parents and other adults who believe that an incident of bullying has occurred are encouraged to
report this behavior to a staff member or school administrator.
Acts of reprisal or retaliation against any person who reports an incident of bullying are prohibited.
Any student who is determined to have knowingly falsely accused another of bullying shall be
subject to disciplinary consequences.
Reports of alleged bullying may be made anonymously, except by school staff, coaches and advisors,
but in no instance will disciplinary action be taken against any person or organization affiliated with
the schools solely on the basis of an anonymous report.
The school principal or superintendent’s designee will forward a copy of the completed Reporting
Form to the superintendent.
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 2 of 4

NEPN/NSBA Code: JICK-R
Safety Measures
The school principal or superintendent’s designee will communicate to the parent(s) or guardian(s)
of the student(s) who was believed to have been bullied the measures being taken to ensure the
safety of the student who was believed to have been bullied and to prevent further acts of bullying.
These measures are documented on the Responding Form (JICK-E2)
Responding/Investigation
The school principal or superintendent’s designee will:
▪ Ensure that all reports of alleged bullying are investigated and responded to within five
school days and that documentation of the investigation is provided to the superintendent
within a reasonable period of time using the Responding Form (JICK-E2).
▪ Inform parent(s) or guardian(s) of the student(s) who was alleged to have bullied AND of the
student(s) who was believed to have been bullied that a report of an alleged incident of
bullying has been made;
▪ Communicate to the parent(s) or guardian(s) of a student(s) who was believed to have been
bullied the measures being taken to ensure the safety of the student(s) who was believed to
have been bullied and to prevent further acts of bullying;
▪ Inform parent(s) or guardian(s) of the students involved the findings of the investigation and
actions to be taken;
▪ Communicate with local or state law enforcement agency if it’s believed that the pursuit of
criminal charges or a civil action under the Maine Civil Rights Act may be appropriate.
Remediation
If it is determined that there is a substantiated incident of bullying, the school principal or
superintendent’s designee will:
▪ Determine the specific nature(s) of the incident, alternative discipline actions, and
appropriate consequences;
▪ Complete the Remediation Form (JICK-E3);
▪ Provide a copy of the Remediation Form to the superintendent; and
▪ Assure that the substantiated incident of bullying is reported to the Maine Department of
Education.
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 3 of 4

NEPN/NSBA Code: JICK-R
Appeal
The parent(s) or guardian(s) and student must be notified of the right to appeal the school principal’s
or superintendent’s designees’ decision related to taking or not taking remedial action as identified in
the appeals procedure established by the school board.
Cross Reference: ACAA-R – Student Harassment and Sexual Harassment Procedure
JICK – Bullying and Cyberbullying Prevention in Schools
JRA-R – Student Education Records and Student Information
Adopted: March 27, 2013
Revised: April 29, 2020
Revised: February 25, 2026
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 4 of 4