SOURCE: https://www.rsu5.org/fs/resource-manager/view/0c2168f7-0f55-4590-be30-29054036b252
SECTION: /board-of-directors-and-policies/adopted-policies-and-procedures
TITLE: JKAA-R-Procedures on Physical Restraint and Seclusion.pdf
TYPE: Finalsite-PDF
============================================================

NEPN/NSBA Code: JKAA-R
PROCEDURES ON PHYSICAL RESTRAINT AND SECLUSION
These procedures are established for the purpose of meeting the obligations of RSU No. 5 under
state law/regulations and Board Policy JKAA governing the use of physical restraint and
seclusion. These procedures shall be interpreted in a manner consistent with state law and
regulations.
I. PHYSICAL RESTRAINT
To the extent possible, physical restraint will be implemented by staff certified in a
training program approved by the Maine Department of Education. If untrained staff
have intervened and initiated a physical restraint in an emergency, trained staff must be
summoned to the scene to assume control of the situation if the emergency continues.
This procedure does not preclude law enforcement personnel, or other first responders
from implementing physical restraints in carrying out their professional responsibilities.
A. Permitted Uses of Physical Restraint
1. Physical restraint may be used only when the behavior of a student
presents an imminent risk of serious physical injury to the student or
others, and only after other less intrusive interventions have failed or been
deemed inappropriate. The physical restraint must end immediately upon
the cessation of the imminent risk of serious physical injury to the student
or another person, and should involve the least amount of force necessary
to protect the student or other person.
2. Serious physical injury is any impairment of the physical condition of a
person, whether self-inflicted or inflicted on someone else, that requires a
medical practitioner, including but not limited to, a school nurse, to
evaluate and/or treat the person.
3. Prescribed medications, harnesses, seat belts and other assistive or
protective devices may be used as permitted by law and described in
Policy JKAA.
4. Parents/legal guardians may be requested to provide assistance with their
child at any time.
B. Prohibited Forms and Uses of Physical Restraint
1. Physical restraint used for punitive purposes; as a therapeutic or
educational intervention; for staff convenience; or to control challenging
behavior.
2. Physical restraint used to prevent property destruction or disruption of the
environment in the absence of a risk of serious physical injury or harm.
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 1 of 11

NEPN/NSBA Code: JKAA-R
3. Physical restraint that is life threatening, restricts breathing or restricts
blood flow to the brain, including prone restraint.
4. Physical restraint that relies on pain for control, including but not limited
to joint hyperextension, excessive force, unsupported take-downs (e.g.,
tackles), the use of any physical structure (e.g., wall, railing or post),
punching and hitting.
5. Physical restraint that is contraindicated based on the child’s disability,
health care needs, or medical or psychiatric condition if appropriately
documented in:
● A health care directive or medical management plan;
● A school-approved behavior plan;
● An IEP or an Individual Family Service Plan (IFSP); or
● A school-approved 504 or ADA plan.
6. Aversive procedures and mechanical and chemical restraints.
a. Aversive procedures are defined as the use of a substance or
stimulus, intended to modify behavior, which the person
administering it knows or should know is likely to cause physical
and/or emotional trauma to a student, even when the substance or
stimulus appears to be pleasant or neutral to others. Such
substances and stimuli include but are not limited to infliction of
bodily pain (e.g., hitting, pinching, slapping); water spray; noxious
fumes; extreme physical exercise; costumes or signs.
b. Mechanical restraints are defined as any restraint that uses a device
to restrict a student’s freedom of movement. Such restraints do not
include adaptive devices or mechanical supports to achieve proper
body position, balance or alignment to allow greater freedom of
movement, or the use of vehicle safety restraints when used as
intended during the transport of a student in a moving vehicle.
c. Chemical restraints are defined as the use of drug or medication
that is not prescribed as the standard treatment of a student’s
medical or psychiatric condition by a licensed physician or other
qualified health professional acting under the scope of the
professional’s authority under state law that is used on a student to
control behavior or restrict freedom of movement.
C. Monitoring Students in Physical Restraint
1. At least two adults must be present at all times when physical restraint is
used except when, for safety reasons, waiting for a second adult to arrive
is precluded by the particular circumstances.
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 2 of 11

NEPN/NSBA Code: JKAA-R
2. The student must be continuously monitored until they no longer present a
risk of injury or harm to the student or others.
3. If an injury occurs, applicable school policies and procedures should be
followed.
D. Termination of Physical Restraint
1. The staff involved in the use of physical restraint must continually assess
for signs that the student in physical restraint is no longer presenting an
imminent risk of serious physical injury to themselves or others, and the
physical restraint must be discontinued immediately after it is determined
that the imminent risk of serious physical harm has ended.
a. The time a student is in physical restraint must be monitored and
recorded.
b. If physical restraint continues for more than ten (10) minutes, an
administrator/designee shall determine whether continued physical
restraint is warranted, and shall continue to monitor the status of
the physical restraint every ten (10) minutes until the restraint is
terminated.
c. If attempts to release a student from physical restraint have been
unsuccessful and the student continues to present behaviors that
create an imminent risk of serious physical injury to the student or
to others, then staff may request additional assistance from other
school staff, parents, medical providers, or other appropriate
persons or organizations.
II. SECLUSION
To the extent possible, seclusion will be implemented by staff certified in a training
program approved by the Maine Department of Education. If untrained staff have
intervened and initiated seclusion in an emergency, trained staff must be summoned to the
scene as soon as possible.
A “timeout” where a student requests, or complies with an adult request, for a break is
not considered seclusion under this procedure. Seclusion also does not include any
situation where others are present in the room or defined area with the student (including
but not limited to classrooms, offices and other school locations).
A. Permitted Uses and Location of Seclusion
1. Seclusion may be used only as an emergency intervention when the
behavior of a student presents an imminent risk of serious bodily injury to
the student or others, and only after other less intrusive interventions have
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 3 of 11

NEPN/NSBA Code: JKAA-R
failed or been deemed inappropriate. The seclusion must end immediately
upon the cessation of the imminent risk of serious physical injury to the
student or another person.
2. Serious physical injury is any impairment of the physical condition of a
person, whether self-inflicted or inflicted on someone else, that requires a
medical practitioner, including but not limited to, a school nurse, to
evaluate and/or treat the person.
3. Seclusion may occur in any part of a school building with adequate light,
heat, ventilation and of normal room height.
a. Seclusion may not take place in a locked room.
b. If a specific room is designated as a seclusion room, it must be a
minimum of sixty (60) square feet; have adequate light, heat and
ventilation; be of normal room height; contain an unbreakable
observation window in a wall or door; and must be free of
hazardous materials and objects which the student could use to
self-inflict bodily injury.
4. Parents/legal guardians may be requested to provide assistance with their
child at any time.
B. Prohibited Uses of Seclusion
1. Seclusion used for punitive purposes; as a therapeutic or educational
intervention; for staff convenience; or to control challenging behavior.
2. Seclusion used solely to prevent property destruction or disruption of the
environment in the absence of an imminent risk of serious physical injury.
3. Seclusion that is life threatening.
4. Seclusion that is contraindicated based on the child’s disability, health care
needs, or medical or psychiatric condition if appropriately documented in:
● A health care directive or medical management plan;
● A school-approved behavior plan;
● An IEP or IFSP; or
● A school-approved 504 or ADA plan.
C. Monitoring Students in Seclusion
1. At least one adult must be physically present at all times to continuously
monitor a student in seclusion. The adult, while not present in the room or
defined area, must be situated so that the student is visible at all times.
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 4 of 11

NEPN/NSBA Code: JKAA-R
2. The student must be continuously monitored until they no longer present
an imminent risk of serious physical injury to the student or others.
3. If an injury occurs, applicable school policies and procedures should be
followed.
D. Termination of Seclusion
1. The staff involved in the seclusion must continually assess for signs that
the student is no longer presenting an imminent risk of serious physical
injury to the student or others, and the seclusion must be discontinued as
soon as the imminent risk ceases.
a. The time a student is in seclusion must be monitored and recorded.
b. If seclusion continues for more than ten (10) minutes, an
administrator/designee shall determine whether continued
seclusion is warranted, and shall continue to monitor the status of
the seclusion every ten (10) minutes until the seclusion restraint is
terminated.
c. If attempts to release a student from seclusion have been
unsuccessful and the student continues to present behaviors
that create an imminent risk of serious physical injury to the
student or others, then staff may request additional assistance from
other school staff, parents, medical providers, or other appropriate
persons or organizations.
III. NOTIFICATION AND REPORTS OF PHYSICAL RESTRAINT AND SECLUSION
INCIDENTS.
For the purposes of this procedure, an “incident” consists of all actions between the time
a student begins to create an imminent risk of serious physical injury and the time the
student ceases to pose that imminent risk and returns to their regular programming.
A. Notice Requirements
After each incident of physical restraint or seclusion:
1. A staff member involved in the incident shall make an oral notification to
the administrator/designee as soon as possible, but no later than the end of
the school day.
2. An administrator/designee shall notify the parent/legal guardian about the
physical restraint or seclusion (and any related first aid provided) as soon
as practical, but within the school day in which the incident occurred. The
administrator/designee must utilize all available phone numbers or other
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 5 of 11

NEPN/NSBA Code: JKAA-R
available contact information to reach the parent/legal guardian. If the
parent/legal guardian is unavailable, the administrator/designee must leave
a message (if the parent/legal guardian has a phone and message
capability) to contact the school as soon as possible. The parent/legal
guardian must be informed that written documentation will be provided
within seven (7) calendar days.
3. If the physical restraint or seclusion incident occurred outside the school
day, the notifications must be made as soon as possible and in accordance
with RSU No. 5 usual emergency notification procedures.
4. If serious bodily injury or death of a student occurs during the
implementation of physical restraint or seclusion, the RSU No.5
emergency notification procedures shall be followed and an
administrator/designee shall notify the Maine Department of Education
within twenty-four (24) hours or the next business day.
B. Incident Reports
Each use of physical restraint or seclusion must be documented in an incident
report. The incident report must be completed and provided to an
administrator/designee as soon as practical, and in all cases within two (2) school
days of the incident. The parent/legal guardian must be provided a copy of the
incident report within seven (7) calendar days of the incident.
The incident report must include the following elements:
1. Student name;
2. Age, gender and grade;
3. Does the student have an individualized Education or 504 plan;
4. Location of the incident;
5. Date of the incident;
6. Date of report;
7. Person completing the report;
8. Beginning and ending time of each physical restraint and/or seclusion;
9. Incident start and end time;
10. Total time of incident;
11. Total number of uses of seclusion within the incident period;
a. Beginning and ending time of each use of seclusion within the
incident period;
b. A detailed description of each use of seclusion within the incident
period;
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 6 of 11

NEPN/NSBA Code: JKAA-R
12. Total number of uses of physical restraint within the incident period;
a. Beginning and ending time of each use of physical restraint within
the incident period;
b. A detailed description of each use of physical restraint within the
incident period;
13. Description of prior events and circumstances;
14. Less restrictive interventions tried prior to the use of physical restraint or
seclusion. If none used, explain why;
15. The student behavior that justified the use of physical restraint or
seclusion;
16. A detailed description of the physical restraint or seclusion used;
17. The staff person(s) involved, their role in the physical restraint and/or
seclusion, and their certification, if any, in an approved training program;
18. Description of the incident, including the resolution and process of return
to program, if appropriate;
19. Whether the student has an a. IEP, b. 504 Plan, c. behavior plan, d. IHP or
e. other plan;
20. If a student or staff sustained bodily injury, the date and time of nurse or
response personnel notification and the treatment administered, if any;
21. If a staff member sustained bodily injury, the date and time of nurse or
response personnel notification and the treatment administered, if any.
22. Date, time and method of parent/legal guardian notification; and
23. Date, time of staff debriefing.
Copies of the incident reports shall be maintained in the student’s file and in the
school office.
IV. SCHOOL UNIT RESPONSE FOLLOWING THE USE OF PHYSICAL RESTRAINT
OR SECLUSION.
A. Following each incident of physical restraint or seclusion, an
administrator/designee shall take these steps within two (2) school days
(unless serious bodily injury requiring emergency medical treatment
occurred, in which case these steps must take place as soon as possible,
but no later than the next school day):
1. Review the incident with all staff persons involved to discuss: (a)
whether the use of physical restraint or seclusion complied with
state and school board requirements and (b) how to prevent or
reduce the need for physical restraint and/or seclusion in the future.
2. Meet with the student who was physically restrained or secluded to
discuss: (a) what triggered the student’s escalation and (b) what the
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 7 of 11

NEPN/NSBA Code: JKAA-R
student and staff can do to reduce the need for physical restraint
and/or seclusion in the future.
B. Following the meetings, staff must develop and implement a written plan
for response and de-escalation for the student. If a plan already exists,
staff must review it and make revisions, if appropriate. For the purposes
of this procedure, “de-escalation” is the use of behavior management
techniques intended to cause a situation involving problem behavior of a
student to become more controlled, calm and less dangerous, thus
reducing the risk of injury or harm.
V. PROCEDURE FOR STUDENTS AFTER EVERY THIRD INCIDENT
The school unit will make reasonable, documented efforts to encourage parent/legal
guardian participation in the meetings required in this section, and to schedule meetings
at times convenient for parents/legal guardians to attend.
A. Special Education/504 Students
1. After every third incident of physical restraint and/or seclusion in one
school year, the student’s IEP or 504 Team shall meet within ten (10)
school days of the third incident to discuss the incident and consider the
need to conduct an FBA (functional behavioral assessment) and/or
develop a BIP (behavior intervention plan), or amend an existing one.
2. Schools are not required to hold more than one meeting within any
30-school-day period to address restraints or seclusion, notwithstanding
the “after every third incident” standard noted above.
B. All Other Students
1. After every third incident of physical restraint and/or seclusion in one
school year, a team consisting of the parent/legal guardian,
administrator/designee, a teacher for the student, a staff member involved
in the incident (if not the administrator/designee or teacher already
invited), and other appropriate staff shall meet within ten (10) school days
to discuss the incidents.
2. Schools are not required to hold more than one meeting within any
30-school-day period to address restraints or seclusion, notwithstanding
the “after every third incident” standard noted above.
3. The team shall consider the appropriateness of a referral to special
education and, regardless of whether a referral to special education is
made, the need to conduct an FBA (functional behavior assessment)
and/or develop a BIP (behavior intervention plan).
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 8 of 11

NEPN/NSBA Code: JKAA-R
VI. CUMULATIVE REPORTING REQUIREMENTS
A. Reports within the School Unit
Each building administrator must report the following data on a quarterly and
annual basis:
1. Physical Restraint
a. total number of incidents that include the use of physical restraints;
b. the aggregate number of uses of physical restraint;
c. the aggregate number of students placed in physical restraint;
d. the aggregate number of students with disabilities and an individualized
education program under state and federal special education laws or a plan
pursuant to Section 504 of the federal Rehabilitation Act of 1973, placed in
physical restraints;
e. the aggregate number of serious physical injuries to students related to
physical restraint;
f. the aggregate number of serious physical injuries to staff related to physical
restraint;
g. aggregate number of uses of physical restraint;
h. aggregate number of students placed in physical restraint;
i. aggregate number of serious bodily injuries to students related to the use of
restraint; and
j. aggregate number of serious bodily injuries to staff related to physical
restraint and seclusion.
2. Seclusion:
a. total number of incidents that include the use of seclusion;
b. the aggregate number of uses of seclusion;
c. the aggregate number of students placed in seclusion;
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 9 of 11

NEPN/NSBA Code: JKAA-R
d. the aggregate number of students with disabilities and an individualized
education program under state and federal special education laws or a plan
pursuant to Section 504 federal Rehabilitation Act of 1973, placed in
seclusion;
e. the aggregate number of serious physical injuries to students related to
seclusion;
f. the aggregate number of serious physical injuries to staff related to
seclusion;
B. Superintendent Review of Reports.
1. The superintendent or chief administrator shall review cumulative reports
received as set forth in this section and identify those areas that can be addressed
to reduce the future use of physical restraint and seclusion. These cumulative
reports may be requested by the Department of Education at any time.
C. Reports to Maine Department of Education
Each covered entity shall submit to the department an annual report on incidents
of physical restraint and seclusion of students of that covered entity that includes:
1. Physical Restraint:
a. total number of incidents that include the use of physical restraints;
b. the aggregate number of uses of physical restraint;
c. the aggregate number of students placed in physical restraint;
d. the aggregate number of students with disabilities and an individualized
education program under state and federal special education laws or a plan
pursuant to Section 504 of the federal Rehabilitation Act of 1973, placed
in physical restraints;
e. the aggregate number of serious physical injuries to students related to
physical restraint; and
f. the aggregate number of serious physical injuries to staff related to
physical restraint.
2. Seclusion:
a. total number of incidents that include the use of seclusion;
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 10 of 11

NEPN/NSBA Code: JKAA-R
b. the aggregate number of uses of seclusion;
c. the aggregate number of students placed in seclusion;
d. the aggregate number of students with disabilities and an individualized
education program under state and federal special education laws or a plan
pursuant to Section 504 of the federal Rehabilitation Act of 1973, placed
in seclusion;
e.the aggregate number of serious physical injuries to students related to
seclusion; and
f. the aggregate number of serious physical injuries to staff related to
seclusion;
Legal Reference: 20-A MRSA §§ 4014, 4502(5)(M); 4009
Chapter 33 (Maine Department of Education Rules)
Cross Reference: EBCA – Comprehensive Emergency Management Plan
JKAA – Use of Physical Restraint and Seclusion
JK – Student Discipline
KLG – Relations with Law Enforcement Authorities
KLG-R - Relations with Law Enforcement Authorities Administrative
Procedures
Administrative Procedure Adopted: March 16, 2010
Administrative Procedure Revised: December 14, 2010
Board of Directors Adopted: November 28, 2012
Revised: June 12, 2013
Revised: January 24, 2018
Revised: February 7, 2024
Revised: November 19, 2025
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 11 of 11