SOURCE: https://www.rsu5.org/fs/resource-manager/view/9ab7796b-03a5-4f01-b633-1459fa13e56b
SECTION: /board-of-directors-and-policies/adopted-policies-and-procedures
TITLE: JLF-Child Abuse Reporting, Prevention and Education
TYPE: Finalsite-PDF
============================================================

NEPN/NSBA Code: JLF
CHILD ABUSE REPORTING, PREVENTION AND EDUCATION
I. DEFINITIONS
A. Child abuse or neglect. Child abuse or neglect is defined by Maine law as:
i. “a threat to a child’s health or welfare by physical, mental or
emotional injury or impairment, sexual abuse or
exploitation...[statutory references omitted] or deprivation of
essential needs or lack of protection from these by a person
responsible for the child.”
ii. Truancy (for a child who is either 1) age 5 and under age 6 and who
has been voluntarily enrolled in school; or 2) six years of age and
has not completed grade six, if a child described in 1) or 2) has the
equivalent of seven full days of unexcused absences or five
consecutive school days of unexcused absences during a school
year) when the absence is the result of the neglect by a person
responsible for the child.
iii. “a threat to a child’s health or welfare caused by child sex
trafficking by any person, regardless of whether or not the person
is responsible for the child.”
B. Person responsible for the child. A “person responsible for the child” means a
person with responsibility for a child’s health or welfare, whether in the child’s
home or another home or a facility which, as part of its function, provides for the
care of the child. It includes the child’s parent, guardian or other custodian.
C. Child Sex Trafficking. Child sex trafficking means the recruitment, harboring,
transportation, provision or obtaining of a child for the purposes of a commercial
sex act.
II. EMPLOYEES’ DUTY TO REPORT
A. Any employee of the school unit (hereinafter referred to as the “notifying
employee”) who has reason to suspect that a child has been or is likely to be
abused or neglected must immediately notify the building administrator.
B. In addition to notifying the building administrator, the employee may also make a
report directly to the Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) or the
District Attorney if required (Section III.B provides further information about
reporting to DHHS and District Attorney).
C. If the notifying employee does not receive written confirmation from the building
administrator/Superintendent within 24 hours of their notification that a report has
been made to DHHS (and the District Attorney if required) the employee shall
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 1 of 5

NEPN/NSBA Code: JLF
make an immediate report directly to DHHS and, if the person suspected is not a
person responsible for the child, to the District Attorney. In such cases, the
employee shall then complete a copy of the Suspected Child Abuse and Neglect
Form (JLF-E) in consultation with the building administrator or Superintendent.
D. If the notifying employee does receive written confirmation from the building
administrator/Superintendent within 24 hours of their notification as described in
section III.D on the Suspected Child Abuse and Neglect Form (JLF-E), they shall
sign the form as acknowledgement that the report was made and return it to the
building administrator/Superintendent.
E. Any volunteer who has reason to suspect that a child has been or is likely to be
abused or neglected is also expected to make a report to the building
administrator, and may also make a report directly to DHHS, and the District
Attorney if required (see Section III.B).
F. Electronic reporting of suspected child abuse or neglect through the
DHHS-approved reporting portal is permitted.
III. ADMINISTRATOR REPORTING AND CONFIRMATION DUTIES
All building administrators and the Superintendents are designated agents to make child
abuse and neglect reports.
A. If a building administrator receives the report, they shall notify the Superintendent
immediately.
B. The Superintendent or building administrator shall then make an immediate report
by telephone of suspected abuse or neglect to DHHS. In addition, if the person
suspected is not the parent, guardian or other custodian of the child, the
Superintendent/building administrator shall also make a verbal report to the
District Attorney.
C. The law requires the notifying employee to make their own report to DHHS and
the District Attorney if required, if they have not received confirmation within 24
hours that such a report has been made by the Superintendent or building
administrator.
D. The person making the report to DHHS and/or the District Attorney shall
complete the Suspected Child Abuse or Neglect Form (JLF-E) in consultation
with the notifying employee.
E. The Superintendent or building administrator shall provide a copy of the
Suspected Child Abuse or Neglect Form to the notifying employee within 24
hours of the employee’s initial report. The notifying employee shall sign the
report and return it to the Superintendent or building administrator.
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 2 of 5

NEPN/NSBA Code: JLF
F. The form will be forwarded to DHHS and to the District Attorney if required, and
shall be retained by the school unit for ten years, as specified in the Maine
Archives Rules, along with any other information relevant to the case.
IV. INTERNAL INVESTIGATIONS AND DISCIPLINE
A. Employees. If the person suspected of abuse or neglect is an employee, the
Superintendent/designee shall investigate and take appropriate action, in
accordance with applicable Board policies, collective bargaining contracts, and
federal and state laws.
B. Students. If the person suspected of abuse or neglect is a student, and the abuse or
neglect occurred on school premises, during a school activity, or is otherwise
related to the school, the Superintendent/designee shall investigate and take
appropriate action, in accordance with applicable Board policies and federal and
state laws.
C. School officials should attempt to coordinate investigations with DHHS and law
enforcement to the extent possible, in light of the school’s obligation to protect the
safety and security of the school environment. Unless there are extenuating
circumstances, any internal interviews of a child who may have been abused or
neglected will be conducted by a person who has knowledge of appropriate
techniques for interviewing alleged victims of abuse or neglect.
V. INTERVIEWS OF CHILD AND SCHOOL PERSONNEL
DHHS personnel shall be permitted to meet with and interview the child named in the
report when the child is present at the school as provided in this section.
The building administrator or designee shall:
A. Require the DHHS employee requesting to interview the child to provide written
certification that in the Department’s judgment, the interview is necessary to carry
out its duties;
B. Require the DHHS caseworker to discuss the circumstances of the interview and
any relevant information regarding the alleged abuse or neglect with the child’s
teacher or school counselor or the school nurse, social worker or building
administrator, as the caseworker determines is necessary to provide needed
emotional support to the child prior to and following the interview;
C. Not place conditions on how the interview is conducted, including, but not
necessarily limited to requiring that certain persons be present during the
interview; prohibiting certain persons from being present during the interview;
and requiring notice to or consent from a parent or guardian.
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 3 of 5

NEPN/NSBA Code: JLF
D. Provide an appropriate, quiet and private place for the interview; and
E. Not disclose any information about DHHS’s intention to interview the child
except to school officials or the school’s attorney who need the information to
comply with the interview request.
VI. CONFIDENTIALITY OF INFORMATION AND RECORDS
All records, reports and information concerning alleged cases of child abuse and neglect
shall be kept confidential to the extent required by Board policies and applicable law.
The building administrator/designee is permitted to release a child’s school records
without prior consent of the parent/guardian to DHHS or law enforcement officials as
necessary to protect the health or safety of the child or other individuals.
VII. GOOD FAITH IMMUNITY FROM LIABILITY; RETALIATION PROHIBITED
Any person who in good faith reports, assists DHHS in making the child available for an
interview, or participates in the investigation or proceedings of a child protection
investigation is immune from any criminal or civil liability for the act of reporting or
participating in the investigation or proceeding. Good faith does not include instances
when a false report is made and the person knows the report is false.
The school unit prohibits any retaliation against an employee who makes a good faith
report of child abuse and neglect in accordance with this policy.
VIII. CHILD ABUSE AWARENESS AND PREVENTION TRAINING FOR SCHOOL
EMPLOYEES
A. All school employees shall receive training on child abuse/neglect and
reporting procedures every four years and within six months of hire as
required by law.
B. The training about child sexual abuse awareness and prevention shall
be delivered by a qualified instructor(s) and be “evidence-informed.”
C. The training about sexual abuse awareness and prevention is intended
to:
i. Increase awareness of developmentally appropriate and inappropriate
sexual behaviors in children;
ii. Increase ability to identify indicators of sexual abuse, including physical
and psychosocial indicators on a spectrum (including lower to higher
probability);
iii. Increase ability to effectively respond to sexual behavior or disclosures
or suspicions of child sexual abuse; and
iv. Include local child sexual abuse and sexual assault resources.
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 4 of 5

NEPN/NSBA Code: JLF
IX. CHILD SEXUAL ABUSE PREVENTION EDUCATION FOR STUDENTS
Students in pre-kindergarten through grade 5 will receive child sexual abuse
prevention education curriculum programs delivered by qualified instructors as part
of the health education curriculum aligned with the Learning Results Health
Education Standards and follow an appropriate scope and sequence. The curriculum
will be consistent with evidence-informed, age-appropriate child sexual abuse
prevention education for students, and include:
A. Age-appropriate education regarding physical and personal boundaries,
including biologically accurate body terminology;
B. Help children identify unsafe or uncomfortable situations including a range of
feelings, touches or violations of physical boundaries;
C. Help children identify safe adults with whom they could discuss unsafe or
uncomfortable situations; and
D. Helps children identify and develop skills to support a friend who
may be experiencing unsafe or uncomfortable situations.
Legal Reference: 22 MRSA Chap. 1071, Child and Family Services and Child
Protection Act
20 USC § 1232g, Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act
20-A M.R.S.A. §§ 5001-A(3); 5051-A(1-D)
Cross Reference: ACAA – Harassment and Sexual Harassment of Students
GBEBB - Staff Conduct with Students
JEA - Compulsory Student Attendance
JHB - Truancy
JLF-E – Suspected Child Abuse and Neglect Report Form
JRA – Student Records
Adopted: March 24, 2010
Reviewed: March 27, 2013
Revised: November 18, 2015
Revised: November 30, 2016
Revised: June 11, 2025
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 5 of 5