SOURCE: https://www.rsu5.org/fs/resource-manager/view/b16a182a-580b-416b-9371-e9a780e28e52
SECTION: /board-of-directors-and-policies/adopted-policies-and-procedures
TITLE: KF-Community Use of School Facilities.pdf
TYPE: Finalsite-PDF
============================================================

NEPN/NSBA Code: KF
COMMUNITY USE OF SCHOOL FACILITIES
DEFINITION: “School Facilities” are buildings and grounds, parking lots, playing fields and
fixed or movable equipment.
It is the Board of Director’s desire that the local taxpayers should be able to obtain maximum use
of the facilities, to the extent consistent with the primary educational function of the school. It is
intended that community uses for educational, recreational, social, civic, philanthropic and like
purposes be approved by the administration, in accordance with this policy, the regulations, and
the fee schedule.
The Superintendent is responsible for developing administrative procedures which provide for
the following: timely applications, uses which do not interfere with educational or
extracurricular programs of the public school students, preference to local, not-for-profit
organizations, and the acceptance of appropriate responsibility and liability.
The policies, procedures and any fees referred to herein apply to all RSU No. 5 facilities with the
exception of the Freeport Performing Arts Center and the Joan Benoit Samuelson Track and
Field. For policies, procedures and fees related to the FPAC, please see KF-R1: Guidelines for
the Freeport Performing Arts Center, and KF-R2: Guidelines for School Use of the Freeport
Performing Arts Center. For policies and procedures related to the Track and Field, please see
“Guidelines for the Use of the Joan Benoit-Samuelson Track and Field.”
These factors are to further guide community use:
I. Groups that may use School Facilities include the following:
a. RSU No. 5 school curricular-related groups;
b. RSU No. 5 Board of Director’s sanctioned co-curricular and extra-curricular
groups;
c. RSU No. 5 Board of Director’s sanctioned Community Programs groups;
d. School-related organizations, such as booster groups or parent-teacher
associations;
e. Municipal-sponsored groups and organizations from within Durham, Freeport or
Pownal;
f. RSU No. 5 based non-profit organizations. Such groups are considered district-
based if greater than 75% of members are RSU No. 5 residents.
i. Community youth groups
ii. Community adult groups
g. Non-RSU No. 5 based non-profit groups
i. Youth groups
ii. Adult groups
h. Commercial, profit-making groups
II. Availability of Facilities and Scheduling:
a. Use of RSU No. 5 School Facilities beyond the end of the school day shall be at
the sole discretion of RSU No. 5 Community Programs in conjunction with the
Superintendent. Use may be denied when groups cannot meet the requirements
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 1 of 5

NEPN/NSBA Code: KF
set forth in the policy or when it is not in the interests of RSU No. 5 to offer these
spaces or facilities for public or private use.
b. Application for use of School Facilities is to be made through RSU No. 5
Community Programs.
c. In order to attain the highest and best use of the facilities, consideration may be
given to the following factors:
i. Intended use; length of use; number of participants served; length of time
since reservation of space has been approved; building-based programs;
RSU No. 5-based programs; curricular versus extra- or co-curricular use;
history/longevity of user within the space; other factors as deemed
necessary for consideration.
d. Application for building use will ideally be submitted a minimum of twenty
working days in advance.
e. A master schedule of all events scheduled in all of the School Facilities will be
maintained by RSU No. 5 Community Programs and made available to district
administrators.
f. Community adults and children are free to use outdoor grounds and facilities
outside the school day for recreational purposes whenever the spaces are not
otherwise scheduled. However, formal approval of buildings and grounds use
will only be granted to recognized organizations and groups.
g. Repeat use may be denied to any group that has not demonstrated appropriate
conduct and care.
III. Use of Facilities for School-Sponsored Activities
a. The use of any facility by a school activity or directly related co-curricular
activity is dependent upon faculty advisorship. Each activity shall have a faculty
advisor present and in attendance during all building/facility uses. The advisor is
responsible for preserving order and compliance with the provisions for facility
use as outlined within this policy or related form KF-R. The advisor shall be
responsible for controlling and restricting entry and exit to one entrance during
rehearsals and other activities. The advisor shall provide for unlocking and
locking of doors as necessary. The participants shall be required by the advisor to
remain in the immediate area for which he/she has received prior permission to
use.
b. Athletic events and extracurricular activities shall be planned, executed and
controlled by the appropriate principal, athletic director, coaches or appropriate
approved school personnel.
IV. Use of Facilities for All Groups
a. Insurance: Any non-RSU No. 5 group requesting to use a facility must provide
proof of insurance naming Regional School Unit No. 5 as an additional insured in
an amount deemed appropriate to the particular use. The superintendent or
his/her designee has the sole right to determine the amount of insurance for each
event;
b. No Alcohol: No alcoholic beverages may be brought onto school property at any
time;
c. No Tobacco: Tobacco use shall not be allowed on school property;
d. Illegal Uses: School facilities may not be used for any illegal purposes;
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 2 of 5

NEPN/NSBA Code: KF
e. No Marijuana: No marijuana may be brought onto school property at any time;
f. Billing: RSU No. 5 Community Programs will bill Applicants at the appropriate
rate. Payment of charges will be forwarded promptly after receipt of billings, in
any case no later than 30 days;
g. Use of Special Equipment: A minimum of one-week advance notice shall be
given for any special equipment required. Additional charges may apply;
h. Use of Electrical Equipment: Approved school personnel shall supervise or
control all electrical arrangements and use of equipment as deemed necessary;
i. Use of Technology: A member of the technology staff shall be consulted to
determine the availability of technology;
j. Preserving Order: Applicant is responsible for preserving order and shall detail in
advance supervisory plans for school authorities, which retain final authority.
Police security will be provided and arranged for by Applicant at Applicant’s
expense when required by the school administration and/or by state/local
regulations;
k. Staff Member Present: A staff member must be present during the entire time the
facilities are in use. The building administrator and RSU No. 5 Community
Programs must approve any exception to this rule in advance. No keys will be
provided; instead, building must be secured and opened by a staff member. If the
facility is being used during a time when no such staff is present, the applicant
will assume all expenses related to the costs of having staff present;
l. Kitchen Facilities may not be used for non-school purposes unless approved by
the Director of Nutrition. A member of the kitchen staff will be on duty for
supervisory purposes and any expense involved must be paid by the user in
addition to any other charges;
m. Gambling: Gambling on school property is prohibited unless allowed as an
approved, legal, fundraiser (i.e. casino nights, fifty-fifty raffles and bingo) for
school or community booster groups. Such activities must be approved by the
superintendent (or his/her designee);
n. Weapons/Flames: The use of weapons, open flames or other incendiary special
effects is prohibited at all facilities unless approved in advance by the
superintendent (or his/her designee).
o. Animals on Premises: Individuals seeking to bring animals into school facilities
shall follow RSU No. 5 Board policy IMGA: Service Animals in Schools;
p. Loss or Damage: Any non-RSU No. 5 group shall assume liability for the loss or
damage of articles brought to the facility and any damage to the building, grounds
or equipment that may occur during use;
q. School Furnishings or Fixtures may be moved only with prior approval. It is the
responsibility of the user to restore the facility to its original condition or to pay
custodial staff for this service;
r. Responsible Party: The individual whose signature appears on the facility use
form application will be considered the person responsible for supervision of the
facility requested. He/she will also be responsible for the safety and well-being of
all people at the facility. In the case of non-RSU No. 5 users, he/she will also be
the contact to resolve disputes related to costs incurred due to damages to the
facility or equipment during the permitted time period;
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 3 of 5

NEPN/NSBA Code: KF
s. Cancellations: The superintendent, or his/her designee, has sole authority to
determine whether the facilities should be closed for reasons of public safety.
Notification will be made as soon as possible. Contracts in force for periods
during which the school is closed for reasons of public safety are cancelled
automatically without penalty to either party. However, every effort will be made
to reschedule any cancelled event to a mutually acceptable date. If the user finds
it necessary to cancel an event, RSU No. 5 Community Programs must be notified
at least 24 hours prior to the event. If no notice is received, the person or group
renting the space will pay the costs of any expenses incurred.
t. Hold Harmless: Any individual or group utilizing RSU No. 5 School Facilities
for any purpose (including non-permitted walk-on use) agrees to save, indemnify
and hold harmless RSU No. 5 and all its employees, RSU No. 5 Board of
Directors and all of its members, and RSU No. 5 Community Programs and all of
its employees or designees, from and against, any and all liabilities, actions,
courses of action and damages arising out of any negligent or tortuous acts on the
part of the facilities’ applicant, applicants’ employees or agents, and from any and
all fines, suits, claims, demands and actions of any kind or nature of any and all
persons by virtue of or arising from the use of said facilities, equipment, or
activity participation. It is also important to note that participation in recreational
and athletic activities can cause bodily injury, sickness, disease, or death or injury
to or destruction of tangible property, including the loss or use thereof. Therefore,
all of the aforementioned groups and individuals shall also be held harmless from
and against all claims, damages, losses, and expenses, just or unjust, including but
not limited to costs of defense, including attorney’s fees arising out of or resulting
from the performance of any facility use agreement.
V. Rental and Other Fees
a. Rental Fees. Users shall pay rent on a multi-increment scale that reflects highest
amounts for groups engaging in a profit-making enterprise on school grounds, as
shown on Procedure KF-R: School Facilities Rate Chart.
b. User Fees.
i. Custodial fees and other staff costs will be charged when necessary to the
use of the facility for users as shown on Procedure KF-R and/or KF-R1.
ii. Equipment use fees will be charged as deemed appropriate. Requests for
the use of equipment must be made to RSU No. 5 Community Programs at
least 10 working days prior to the requested date. Not all equipment is
available for public use.
iii. To the extent feasible, the hours during which school facilities are used
shall coincide with the hours during which custodians are on regularly
scheduled duty. To the extent after-hour use results in overtime pay for
custodians or other staff, additional costs will be the permitted user’s
expense. Custodial services may include set-up, breakdown,
locking/unlocking doors, and general maintenance.
iv. A regular RSU No. 5 food services worker shall be required when renting
any school kitchen facility. Associated costs shall be charged at the
existing contract rate, and overtime may be assessed as appropriate.
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 4 of 5

NEPN/NSBA Code: KF
c. Regional educational organizations that are led by RSU No. 5 staff members may
be granted waivers from room use fees provided that no expenses are incurred by
RSU No. 5 as a result of the use of the facilities and no fee is collected from
participants to attend the meeting or event. Such waivers must be requested in
writing to RSU No. 5 Community Programs prior to the event.
Adopted: August 25, 2010
Reviewed: April 24, 2013
Revised: January 10, 2018
Reviewed: November 20, 2019
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 5 of 5