SOURCE: https://www.rsu5.org/fs/resource-manager/view/8b2c77da-fb8d-4164-b907-4d2e027574d2
SECTION: /board-of-directors-and-policies/adopted-policies-and-procedures
TITLE: BBAB-E - Board of Directors Self-Evaluation Instrument
TYPE: Finalsite-PDF
============================================================

NEPN/NSBA Code: BBAB-E
BOARD OF DIRECTORS SELF-EVALUATION INSTRUMENT
Introduction
The Board of Directors Evaluation System is based upon the National School Boards Association Standards of Practice.
There are five key standards of Board leadership incorporated into this model:
● Vision, Leadership & Accountability
● Board Governance & Policy
● Communication & Community Relations
● Fiscal Resources, Staff Recruitment & Environment
● Ethical Leadership
Timeline
Month
End of July Distribution of evaluation (electronically)
July/August Individual board members complete the self-evaluation electronically for compilation
by the Board Chair or designee.
August/September Board reviews compiled results. Results will be used by the Board as part of its
annual goal setting and planning for the year.
PART I: Standards of Leadership
These standards are rated using the following scale:
4 - Exemplary ratings are reserved for performance that significantly exceeds proficiency and could serve as a model for
leaders district-wide or even statewide. Few Boards are expected to demonstrate Exemplary performance on more than a
small number of targets.
3 - Proficient ratings represent fully satisfactory performance. It is the rigorous standard expected for most experienced
Boards and the goal for new Boards performing at the basic level. Proficient Boards demonstrate acceptable leadership
practice and meet or make progress on all outcome targets.
2 - Basic ratings mean that performance is meeting proficiency in some components but not others. Improvement is
necessary and expected.
1 - Does Not Meet ratings indicate performance that is unacceptably low on one or more standards and makes little or no
progress. Ratings of ineffective are always cause for concern.
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 1 of 6

NEPN/NSBA Code: BBAB-E
Standard 1: Vision, Leadership & Accountability
Descriptor: The Board of Directors commits to a vision of high student achievement and effective instruction,
specifies clear goals to realize that vision, demands accountability for results, and supports continuous
improvement of the district.
Possible Data Sources:
● Alignment with District vision and mission statement
● Adherence to Standards of Ethics
● Established goals
● Board agendas
● Board presentations
● Board retreats
● Board communications
● Annual evaluation of the Superintendent
● Board self evaluation
Rating for Standard 1: Vision, Leadership & Accountability
4 3 2 1
Exemplary Proficient Basic Does Not
Meet
A. The Board develops a shared mission and vision that reflects
student achievement and community priorities, and communicates it
to the community.
B. The Board develops annual District goals in alignment with the
District vision and mission and adopts a strategic plan developed by
the Superintendent to meet those goals. Goals are communicated to
the community.
C. The Board regularly monitors progress on District goals, effective
instruction, and student achievement with data-based information.
D. The Board keeps informed about what children are learning
through reports on scholastic achievement, vocational programs, and
the impact of extra-curricular activities.
E. The Board annually evaluates the job performance of the
Superintendent and monitors the progress made on the
Superintendent’s goals.
F. The Board conducts a self-evaluation to monitor its own
performance and participates in professional development, including
Board training and seminars.
Comments:
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 2 of 6

NEPN/NSBA Code: BBAB-E
Standard 2: Board Governance & Policy
Descriptor: The Board of Directors works effectively as a team and collaborates with the Superintendent,
exhibits a shared understanding of Board and Superintendent roles, maintains a set of Board operating
procedures, and leads/governs the District through policy.
Possible Data Sources:
● Date and agenda of annual orientation
● Policy review and updates
● Board policy manual
● Board orientation materials
● Attendance and state-mandated trainings
Rating for Standard 2: Board Governance & Policy
4 3 2 1
Exemplary Proficient Basic Does Not
Meet
A. The Board and Superintendent participate in an annual retreat to .
build team relationships, review roles, responsibilities, and Board
operations, and orient new Board members.
B. The Board has a procedure in place for regularly reviewing .
existing policies and developing new ones.
C. The Board closely adheres to its own procedures, protocols, and
policies for effective Board operations.
D. The Board clearly understands its governance role and .
responsibilities, adheres to open meeting laws, and delegates district
operation responsibilities to the Superintendent.
E. Board members publicly support the decision of the majority and
speak with a unified voice.
F. Board leadership acts as a mentor to new members to help them
learn the ropes and provides new members with a detailed
explanation of the Board’s mission.
Comments:
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 3 of 6

NEPN/NSBA Code: BBAB-E
Standard 3: Communication & Community Relations
Descriptor: The Board of Directors effectively communicates with the Superintendent and the local
community, represents community interests and values, and ensures District information and decisions are
communicated to the community.
Possible Data Sources:
● Communication policies or procedures
● Schedules or invitations to community forums
● Reports or presentations on programs that demonstrate community partnerships
● Legislative meetings. Letters or advocacy efforts
● Newsletters and website
● Survey results
Rating for Standard 3: Communication & Community Relations
4 3 2 1
Exemplary Proficient Basic Does Not
Meet
A. The Board develops a collaborative relationship with the
Superintendent, keeping cooperation and respectful
discussions at the center of its deliberations.
B. The Board establishes effective communication with
parents, students, staff, and community members while
respecting the chain of command and lines of responsibility.
C. The Board works with the Superintendent to gain input
from the community using forums, surveys, or other vehicles,
following agreed-upon procedures.
D. The Board actively promotes support for the District
through its vision and promoting educational opportunities for
all students.
E. The Board is an advocate for the District’s interests with
legislators and other elected officials.
Comments:
Standard 4: Fiscal Resources, Staff Recruitment & Environment
Descriptor: The Board of Directors oversees the fiscal conditions of the District, aligns resources to meet
District goals, ensures appropriate policies for staff recruitment and retention, supports district wide learning
and promotes conditions for health and safety.
Possible Data Sources:
● Process for budget development and adoption
● Communication materials, website, newsletters
● Facilities plan and schedule for updates
● Audit report
● Policy on recruitment and hiring
● Professional development plans
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 4 of 6

NEPN/NSBA Code: BBAB-E
Rating for Standard 4: Fiscal Resources, Staff Recruitment & Environment
4 3 2 1
Exemplary Proficient Basic Does Not
Meet
A. The Board adopts an annual budget that adheres to the
provisions of the law and allocates resources based upon the
District’s vision, goals, and priorities for student achievement.
B. The Board keeps the community informed about the financial
needs of the District, seeks cost savings and operational
efficiencies, and invites community input.
C. The board monitors a facilities plan that meets student and
staff health and safety regulations and guidelines.
D. The Board ensures that the finance committee functions in
accordance with regulatory requirements, reviews internal audit
findings, and responds appropriately.
E. The Board supports the recruitment of highly effective
teachers, administration, and staff and provides professional
development and support.
Comments:
Standard 5: Ethical Leadership
Descriptor: The Board of Directors promotes the success of all students and staff, and conducts District
business in a fair, respectful and responsible manner.
Possible Data Sources:
● Articulation or publication of plans and programs for student success
● Code of Ethics Policy
● Standards of Ethics
Rating for Standard 5: Ethical Leadership
4 3 2 1
Exemplary Proficient Basic Does Not
Meet
A. Board members are able to speak their minds without
fear of being ostracized.
B. Board handles conflict openly and constructively.
C. Board members actively promote the belief in the
success of all students in the district.
D. Board members act as conscientious role models and
exhibit professionalism.
E. Board members exercise authority only as a board as a
whole and recognize that no individual board member has
authority to take individual action on behalf of the Board.
F. Board members avoid conflicts of interest and
appropriately disclose if one arises.
G. Board has adopted and annually reaffirms its code of
ethics.
Comments:
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 5 of 6

NEPN/NSBA Code: BBAB-E
Board of Directors Self-Evaluation
Annual Evaluation Rating Form
Standards SUMMATIVE SCORE
Standard 1: Vision, Leadership and Accountability 4 3 2 1
Standard 2: Board Governance and Policy 4 3 2 1
Standard 3: Communications and Community Relations 4 3 2 1
Standard 4: Fiscal Resources, Staff Recruitment & 4 3 2 1
Environment
Standard 5: Ethical Leadership 4 3 2 1
ANNUAL EVALUATION SCORE 4 3 2 1
Approved: December 11, 2019
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 6 of 6