SOURCE: https://www.rsu5.org/fs/resource-manager/view/0cf21acc-d650-4456-96b1-0e69f7a3de1e
SECTION: /board-of-directors-and-policies/adopted-policies-and-procedures
TITLE: EEAEAA-R - Drug and Alcohol Testing of School Bus Drivers Administrative Procedure.pdf
TYPE: Finalsite-PDF
============================================================

Code : EEAEAA-R
DRUG AND ALCOHOL TESTING OF SCHOOL BUS DRIVERS
ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE
The RSU No. 5 Board of Directors, hereinafter referred to as the "Board," is committed
to the establishment of an alcohol and controlled substance testing program that meets
all applicable requirements of the federal Omnibus Transportation Employee Testing
Act of 1991, in addition to pertinent state laws and regulations. The purpose of the
testing program shall be to help prevent accidents and injuries resulting from the misuse
of alcohol and controlled substances by drivers performing safety-sensitive functions.
The following administrative procedure represents a summary of the main provisions
found in federal regulations promulgated to effectuate drug and alcohol testing of bus
drivers. The following procedure in no way attempts to modify said regulations, which
should always be referred to when questions as to implementation of this
policy/procedure arise.
I. APPLICABILITY
All persons operating a commercial motor vehicle in commerce in any state and
subject to the commercial driver's license requirements mandated under both
Federal and state laws, including the Omnibus Transportation Employee Testing
Act of 1991, shall be subject to the drug and alcohol testing provisions herein
contained.
II. IMPLEMENTATION
The Superintendent shall be responsible for implementing a drug and alcohol-
testing program which complies with procedures set forth in Title 49 Parts 40,
382, 390 and 395 of the Federal Code of Regulations. Such testing program shall
include pre-employment/pre-duty drug testing, post-accident testing, random
testing, reasonable suspicion testing, return-to-duty and follow-up testing. This
school unit shall provide parties subject to testing with written notice of materials
and information available to them as required by Part 382.
Bid specifications and contracts for transportation shall require that the contractor
establish a drug and alcohol-testing program which complies with Federal
regulations and that is acceptable to the Board.
III. CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES
Controlled substances in this policy/procedure refer to those covered by the
Omnibus Transportation Employee Testing Act of 1991, including marijuana,
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 1 of 9

Code : EEAEAA-R
cocaine, opiates, amphetamines, and phencyclidine (PCP) MDMA (Ecstasy) and
6-Acetylmorphone (heroin).
IV. SAFETY- SENSITIVE FUNCTION
Safety- sensitive function(s) in this policy/procedure refer to functions defined in
49 CFR §382.107 and §395.2 (On-Duty Time, paragraphs (1) through (6)).
V. PROHIBITIONS
All drivers subject to this policy shall be prohibited from:
A. Using any alcohol while on duty and four (4) hours prior to going on duty;
B. Possessing alcohol while on duty;
C. Reporting for duty or remaining on duty while having an alcohol
concentration of 0.02 or greater;
D. Using any alcohol for eight (8) hours following an accident, or until he/she
undergoes a post-accident alcohol test, whichever occurs first;
E. Refusing to submit to a required alcohol or controlled substance test(s);
F. Reporting for duty or remaining on duty when using any controlled
substance, except when use is pursuant to the instructions of a physician
who advised the driver that the substance does not adversely affect the
driver's ability to safely operate the vehicle; and
G. Reporting for duty, remaining on duty, or performing a safety- sensitive
function, if the driver tests positive for a controlled substance.
VI. REQUIRED TESTING
A. Pre-Employment Testing. Prior to the first time a driver performs a
safety- sensitive function for the school unit, the driver shall undergo
testing for controlled substances. However, no driver shall be subjected to
pre-employment controlled substance testing prior to having been offered
a position. Employment is conditioned upon a verified negative
controlled substance test result.
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 2 of 9

Code : EEAEAA-R
B. Post-Accident Testing. As soon as practicable following an accident,
each driver will be subject to alcohol and controlled substance testing as
follows:
1. Any driver performing safety-sensitive functions with respect to the
vehicle if the accident involved loss of human life;
2. Any driver who receives a citation under State or local law for a
moving violation arising from the accident; and
a. Causes bodily injury to a person who, as a result of the injury
immediately receives medical treatment away from the scene of
the accident; or
b. Should one or more motor vehicles incurring disabling damage
as a result of the accident, require a motor vehicle to be
transported away from the scene by a tow truck or other motor
vehicle.
3. In addition, the following provisions will also apply.
a. Alcohol. If a test required under this section is not administered
within two (2) hours following the accident, the school unit shall
prepare and maintain on file a record stating the reasons the test
was not promptly administered. If a test is not administered
within eight (8) hours following the accident, the school unit
shall cease attempts to administer the test and shall prepare and
maintain the same record. Records shall be submitted to the
Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration (FMCSA) upon
request of the Associate Administrator.
b. Controlled Substances. If a test required by this section is not
administered within thirty-two (32) hours following the accident,
the school unit shall cease attempts to administer the test and
shall prepare and maintain on file a record stating the reasons the
test was not promptly administered. Records shall be submitted
to the FMCSA upon request of Associate Administrator.
C. Random Testing. All drivers subject to this policy/procedure will be
subject to random and unannounced alcohol and controlled substance
testing throughout the year. The minimum annual percentage rate for
testing of bus drivers is as follows:
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 3 of 9

Code : EEAEAA-R
1. Random alcohol testing shall be a minimum of 10 percent of the
number of driver positions each selection period; and
2. Random controlled substance testing shall be a minimum of 50
percent of the number of driver positions each selection period.
When random testing for alcohol and/or controlled substances is
completed through a consortium, the number of drivers to be tested
may be calculated for each individual school unit or may be based on
the total number of drivers covered by the consortium who are
subject to random testing at the same minimum annual percentage
rate under 49 CFR Part 382 or any Department of Transportation
random testing rule.
D. Reasonable Suspicion Testing. All drivers subject to this
policy/procedure shall submit to alcohol and controlled substance testing
when the employer has reasonable suspicion to believe that the driver has
violated the prohibitions found in Part V. of this procedure, with the
exception of Part V. of this procedure, with the exception of Part V.B.
regarding alcohol possession. The school unit shall base its determination
that reasonable suspicion exists requiring the driver to undergo such
testing on observations concerning appearance, behavior, speech or body
odors of the driver. When controlled substances are at issue, observations
may include indications of the chronic and withdrawal effects of
controlled substances.
In addition, the following provisions also apply.
1. Alcohol. Alcohol testing will be performed only if the
aforementioned observations are made during, just preceding, or just
after the period of the work day that the driver is required to be in
compliance with this policy/procedure. If a test required under this
section is not administered within two (2) hours following the
reasonable suspicion determination, the school unit shall prepare and
maintain on file a record stating the reasons the test was not promptly
administered. If a test required under this section is not administered
within eight (8) hours following a determination that reasonable
suspicion exists, the school unit shall cease attempts to administer an
alcohol test and shall state in the record reasons for not administering
the test. The school unit shall submit to the FMCSA records of tests
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 4 of 9

Code : EEAEAA-R
required by this section that were not completed within eight (8)
hours according to the mandates of 49 CFR §382.307 (3).
2. Controlled Substances. The school unit shall, within twenty-four
(24) hours or before the results of the controlled substances test are
released, whichever is earlier, create a written record of the
observations leading to a controlled substances test which shall be
signed by the supervisor or school unit official making said
observations.
E. Return-to-Duty Testing. Prior to returning to duty requiring the
performance of safety-sensitive functions when a driver has engaged in
conduct prohibited under this policy/procedure, the driver shall undergo
a return-to-duty alcohol and/or controlled substances test(s) as
appropriate.
Drivers found to have engaged in prohibited conduct under the alcohol
provisions of this policy/procedure will not be permitted to return to duty
unless the subsequent alcohol test reveals a result less than or consistent
with federal and state standards. In cases involving controlled substances,
a verified negative result is necessary before a driver may return to duty.
F. Follow-up Testing. In the event that a driver has been found to have been
in violation of the prohibitions herein contained and is identified as
requiring assistance in resolving problems associated with alcohol and/or
controlled substances, the school unit shall require the driver to submit to
at least six (6) unannounced follow-up alcohol and/or controlled
substances tests during the first twelve (12) months after returning to
duty. Follow-up tests will be unannounced and may continue for up to
sixty (60) months after returning to duty. Follow-up alcohol testing shall
be conducted only when the driver is performing, just before, or just after
ceasing to perform safety-sensitive functions.
VII. REFUSAL TO SUBMIT TO TESTING
All drivers who are required by federal regulations to submit to drug/alcohol
testing must do so immediately upon being directed to submit to the test(s). A
driver's refusal to submit to testing will subject the driver to immediate removal
from the performance of safety-sensitive functions. In addition, failure to comply
with Federal regulations or this procedure is grounds for disciplinary action up to
and including dismissal. Any of the following actions on the part of a driver
constitutes a refusal to submit to a test:
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 5 of 9

Code : EEAEAA-R
A. Failure to provide adequate specimens/samples of substance(s)
undergoing testing, including but not limited to breath and urine,
without a valid medical reason;
B. Engaging in conduct which obstructs the testing process; and
C. Refusal by an employee to complete and sign testing forms.
VIII. TRAINING FOR SUPERVISORS
This school unit will assign persons who will be designated to determine whether
reasonable suspicion exists to require a driver to undergo testing under Part 382,
with at least sixty (60) minutes of training on alcohol misuse and receive at least
an additional sixty (60) minutes of training on controlled substances. Training
shall cover the physical, behavioral, speech, and performance indicators of
probable alcohol misuse and use of controlled substances.
IX. ENFORCEMENT
This school unit, in its independent authority as an employer, shall subject any
driver who violates this policy/administrative procedure or Federal regulations to
potential disciplinary action up to and including dismissal, except to the extent
that any state law or collective bargaining agreement requires otherwise.
In addition, any driver who refuses to submit to a post-accident, random,
reasonable suspicion, return-to-duty or follow-up test(s) shall not perform or
continue to perform safety-sensitive functions.
Furthermore, no driver tested and found to have an alcohol concentration of 0.02
or greater but less than 0.04 shall perform or continue to perform safety-sensitive
functions including driving a commercial motor vehicle until the start of the
driver's next regularly scheduled duty period, but not less than twenty-four (24)
hours after the test was administered.
X. RECORDS
Employee drug and alcohol tests and results shall be maintained under strict
confidentiality in a secure location with controlled access and released only in
accordance with law. A driver, upon written request, shall receive copies of any
records pertaining to his/her use of drugs or alcohol, including any records
pertaining to his/her drug tests. Records shall be made available to subsequent
employers or other identified persons only when expressly requested in writing
by the driver.
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 6 of 9

Code : EEAEAA-R
XI. NOTIFICATIONS
Each driver shall receive educational materials prior to the school unit's
commencement of alcohol and controlled substances testing. Such material will
explain the requirements of the Code of Federal Regulations, Title 49 Part 382,
and contain a copy of the Board's policy and administrative procedures for
meeting these requirements. Representatives of employee organizations shall be
notified of the availability of this information. The school unit shall also include
in the package of informational material submitted to each driver, a statement
certifying that he/she has received the informational material. The school unit
shall maintain the original signed copy of the statement on file.
In addition to the aforementioned items, the school unit shall also make available
to drivers and representatives of employee organization information which shall
identify:
A. The person designated by the school unit to answer questions about the
materials;
B. The procedures that will be used to test for the presence of alcohol and
controlled substances; protect the driver and the integrity of the testing
processes, safeguard the validity of the test results, and ensure that those
results are attributed to the correct driver;
C. Information concerning the effects of alcohol and controlled substances
on an individual's health, work, and personal life; signs and symptoms of
an alcohol or a controlled substance(s) problem (the driver's or
co-worker's); and available methods of intervening when an alcohol or
controlled substances problem is suspected, including confrontation,
referral to any employee assistance program and/or referral to
management; and
D. Post-accident procedures that will make it possible for a driver to comply
with post-accident testing before any driver operates a commercial
vehicle.
This school unit shall also make available the following information:
A. The results of pre-employment controlled substance test(s) if the applicant
requests such results within sixty (60) calendar days of being notified of
the disposition of the employment application; and
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 7 of 9

Code : EEAEAA-R
B. The results of random, reasonable suspicion and post-accident drug tests
if the results are verified positive. The school unit shall also tell the driver
which controlled substance(s) was verified as positive.
XII. CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES
Drivers shall inform their supervisors if at any time they are using a controlled
substance which their physician has prescribed for therapeutic purposes. Such
substance may be used in conjunction with duty only if the physician has advised
the driver that it will not adversely affect his/her ability to safely operate a
commercial motor vehicle.
XIII. REFERRAL, EVALUATION, AND TREATMENT
A. Referral. A driver who has engaged in conduct prohibited by this
policy/procedure shall be advised by the school unit of resources available
to the driver in evaluating and resolving problems associated with the
misuse of alcohol and use of controlled substances. The information the
bus driver receives will include: names, addresses, and telephone numbers
of substance abuse professionals, counseling and treatment programs, in
addition to information relating to his/her responsibility with regard to
payment of such services.
B. Evaluation/Treatment. A driver who engages in such prohibited
conduct shall be evaluated by a substance abuse professional who shall
determine what assistance or treatment, if any, the employee needs in
resolving controlled substance(s) use.
XIV. RETURN TO DUTY
If a school unit has not discharged a driver due to his/her engagement in
prohibited conduct under this policy/procedure, the bus driver must, prior to
returning to safety-sensitive duties:
A. Undergo return-to-duty testing and obtain an alcohol concentration level
of less than 0.02 and/or a verified negative test for controlled substances;
B. Have been evaluated by a substance abuse professional; and
C. Have followed prescribed and/or recommended treatment.
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 8 of 9

Code : EEAEAA-R
XV. OTHER POLICIES/PROCEDURES
Nothing contained in this administrative procedure shall prevent the Board from
establishing and enforcing independent policies/procedures relating to the
possession, being under the influence of, distribution, sale or use of alcohol or
controlled substances or any misconduct associated therewith and the penalties
for violation of those policies/procedures, up to and including dismissal.
Legal References: 49 CFR Parts 40, 382, 390, 395
Title 26 MRSA §§ 681(g)(B); 685(2); 689
Administrative Procedure Approved: 3/9/10
Administrative Procedure Reviewed: 11/22/11
Administrative Procedure Revised: 12/20/16
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 9 of 9