SOURCE: https://www.rsu5.org/fs/resource-manager/view/34e2c7f5-470b-41b1-9710-cadf1be1313a
SECTION: /board-of-directors-and-policies/adopted-policies-and-procedures
TITLE: EHB-R - Records Retention Schedule
TYPE: Finalsite-PDF
============================================================

Local Government Schedules v.2 page 47
SCHEDULE 18 – SCHOOL RECORDS
School records are broken down into the following categories: General Student Records, Individual Student Records, Curriculum/Program Records, Correspondence Records,
Administrative Records – General Operations, Administrative Records – Property (Facility/Equipment/Land), Financial Records, Personnel Records, Payroll Records, and
School Board Records. Please note that some Series are duplicates or similar to those found elsewhere in the Local Government Record Retention Schedules.
GENERAL STUDENT RECORDS
Series Series Title Description Retention
Used to notify administration of student absences; information Current year
18.1 Attendance Records - Daily
transferred to permanent record.
2 years
18.2 Bus Transportation Lists Record of bus taken by each student for the year.
Reports of suspected abuse/neglect that are required by law;
10 years
18.3 Child Abuse/Neglect Reports retention period is the same as at DHHS, where these reports are
received and investigated.
Annual records include: Name(s) of children, address, ages,
18.4 Home School Student List Permanent
years.
Registrations for students enrolled in recreational activities offered 6 years
18.5 Registrations for Recreational Activities
by the school.
Class rank lists (if applicable), award/honors lists, scholarships,
18.6 Student Achievement Lists Permanent
honor rolls, etc.
Permission slips signed by parents allowing their students to
6 years
18.7 Student Permission Slips participate in school activities such as field trips, viewing of films,
etc.
6 years
18.8 Student Retention Lists List of students retained instead of being promoted.

Local Government Schedules v.2 page 48
INDIVIDUAL STUDENT RECORDS
Series Series Title Description Retention
Name, address, Records of grades, courses taken, attendance, Permanent
18.9 Adult Education Student Records
etc. for students participating in adult education programs.
Annual Registration/Emergency Information completed each year to register students for school Current year
18.10
Information and emergency contact information.
Correspondence between school and parents/guardians; among
Correspondence Concerning Individual Until age 26
18.11 school employees; with outside services providers, etc. regarding
Students
an individual student.
Document completed by all students who are entering the school
18.12 Enrollment Application unit, listing vital information about each student. 6 years
Notes from parents or guardians explaining student lateness, Current year
18.13 Excuse Notes (Late/Absent/Dismissed)
absence, or need for dismissal during the school day.
Records retained related to the High School Equivalency Test,
Permanent
18.14 HiSet Student Records (HiSET), which measures whether students have the academic
skills equivalent to a typical high school graduate.
Records of those students being home schooled, whether Until age 26
18.15 Home School Records
temporarily or on-going.
Records created as children are evaluated against set standards to 5 years
18.16 Kindergarten Screening
determine their readiness for enrollment in kindergarten.
Records related to private tuition agreement for an individual
18.17 Private Tuition Agreements 6 years
student.
Record (including date and recipient) of all student records Until age 26
18.18 Record of Student Records Released
released by the school unit.
Records pertaining to special education referrals and services Until age 26
18.19 Special Education Records
provided to student.
Until age 26
18.20 Student Assistance Team Records Student Assistance Team records.
Contracts between students and teachers or administrators for
18.21 Student Contracts improvement of problem behaviors; athletic contracts, etc. (Not Until graduation
special education related)
Records of student disciplinary actions except suspensions and Until graduation
18.22.a Student Discipline Records – Minor
expulsions.
Student Discipline Records –
18.22.b Records of student suspensions and expulsions Until age 26
Suspension/Expulsion

Local Government Schedules v.2 page 49
Series Series Title Description Retention
Records of student medications, illnesses, injuries (including Until age 26
18.23 Student Health Records
injuries related to athletic activities), vaccinations, etc.
6 years
18.24 Student Insurance Records Records of school-sponsored student insurance.
Records include: student name, address, phone, official high
Permanent
18.25.a Student Records – Permanent school transcript (if applicable), grades, attendance records,
classes attended, grade level completed and year completed.
Records include: notation for any special services received
18.25.b Student Records – Long Term including: Title One, 504, services to Migrant children and ESL; Until age 26
standardized tests.
Current year
18.26 Student Schedules Records of each student's class schedule.
Records related to a Superintendents’ agreement concerning
18.27 Superintendents’ Agreements 6 years
individual student.
Until graduation
18.28 Truancy Records concerning students truant from school.
Until graduation
18.29 Work Permits Work permits on file for students under 16 years old.

Local Government Schedules v.2 page 50
Curriculum/Program Records
Series Series Title Description Retention
Athletic Trainer/Sports Medicine - Sports program records related to use of trainers, and to sports 6 years
18.30
General medicine.
Curriculum (syllabi, lesson plans, etc.) -
18.31 Routine curriculum materials used by teachers. Retain current information only
Routine Materials Used by Teachers
Subject records maintained by school officials on curriculum and
18.32 Curriculum/Program Records 6 years
school programs, including Adult Education.
18.33 Family/Community Program Records Records for family/community open houses, etc. Current year
Records documenting individual, team and group achievements in
Interscholastic/Extracurricular
18.34 interscholastic/extracurricular activities and contests. Records Permanent
Activities
include coach’s/advisor’s reports and team/group rosters.
Records relating to the borrowing, lending, and returning of items
Retain until no longer needed
in the library’s collection. Including, but not limited to: item
18.35.a Library Records - Circulation for Library business, then
circulation history and patron records.
destroy
Non-circulating record copy maintained by school (whether or not
18.35.b Library Records - Yearbooks Permanent
as part of its library collection).
Folders containing lesson plans and resource materials for use by
18.36 Substitute Folders Current year
substitute teachers.
Records of attendance at parents' night events and of programs
18.37 Title One Parent Night Records 6 years
offered on those occasions.

Local Government Schedules v.2 page 51
CORRESPONDENCE RECORDS
Series Series Title Description Retention
Complaints from Public Regarding
Communications from public making a complaint, as well as the
18.38 General Operations (not individual 1 year from resolution of issue
associated school response.
student or employee issues)
Incoming and outgoing correspondence in any media format which
is purely informational in nature and only documents information of
temporary, short-term value; not covered by another record series
30 days or until no longer
18.39.a Correspondence - Transitory or needed to document core functions/operations/services of the
needed
school unit. (Examples include: letters of transmittal, basic
information requests such as hours open, notices/scheduling
meetings, etc.)
Any correspondence documenting core
18.39.b Correspondence - Substantive File with related record series
functions/operations/services of the school unit.
Correspondence Concerning Individual
See Individual Student Records
Students
Records relating to requests from the general public for access to
the school’s public records in accordance with Title 1, Chapter 13,
1 year from the completion of
18.40 Freedom of Access Requests Subchapter 1. Records may include: correspondence relating to
request
the request; records documenting the public records provided to
the requestor.

Local Government Schedules v.2 page 52
ADMINISTRATIVE RECORDS – School Operations
Series Series Title Description Retention
Accident reports completed when employees or public are injured 6 years
18.41 Accident Reports - Employees or Public
on school property or during school activities.
18.42 Administrative Calendars Employee calendars, facility use schedules, meeting schedules. Current year
Materials documenting unique aspects or special traditions of the
18.43.a Administrative Records- Historical Permanent
school or school unit.
Accreditation Committee, Teacher Support Team; Student
Administrative Records – General Retention Review Committee, etc.; minutes, agendas, etc. for staff 6 years
18.43.b
School Operations meetings; records which document policy-implementing activities;
employee handbooks; etc.
Current year
18.43.c Administrative Records - Transitory Phone logs, duty rosters, teacher instructional staff list, etc.
Supporting documents which may be needed to understand and/or See Appendix E, Working
18.44 Administrative Working Documents
benefit the completed action, policy, study, etc. Documents and Drafts
Appointments to boards, commissions, or other offices with
18.45 Appointments/Oaths End of Term Plus 10 Years
accompanying oaths of office, usually in a bound volume or "book."
A surety (security or contract) bond issued by an insurance
company or a bank to guarantee satisfactory completion of a
18.46 Bond Records, Contractor/Surety 6 years after expiration
project by a contractor. Used to fulfill a contractual obligation. If a
contract isn't fulfilled, loss is recovered through the surety bond.
Supplementary employee insurance which protects the school.
Also known as a fidelity bond. Fidelity bonds reimburse employers
18.47 Bond Records, Employee/Fidelity 6 years after expiration
for damages or losses that can arise from theft, forgery, fraud or
embezzlement by staff.

Local Government Schedules v.2 page 53
Series Series Title Description Retention
Charters, bylaws, mission statement or other similar documents
18.48 Charters Permanent
establishing the responsibilities and authority of the school unit.
Federal, state and private grant case files. Retain all records in
18.49 Federal, State and Private Grants Until closed, plus 6 years
accordance with grant requirements.
18.50 Food Service Files All records of school food service operations. 3 years
Each work site where hazardous chemicals are used or stored
Hazardous Chemicals - Chemical
18.51.a must maintain a list, with SDS (see 1.15.b) and any related 20 years
Identification List and Related Records
documents.
Safety Data Sheets explain the hazards and describe the
Hazardous Chemicals - Safety Data
18.51.b measures that should be taken if employees are exposed to Current SDS only
Sheets
chemicals stored or used at the work site.
Includes both claims filed against school unit, and claims filed
18.52 Insurance Claims Until settled plus 6 years
against others by school unit.
Policies carried by school unit to protect itself against all other
18.53.a Insurance Policies, All Other losses except liability claims. Including: medical, automobile, fire, 6 years after expiration
theft, life, and other insurance policies purchased.
Policies carried by school unit to protect itself against liability
18.53.b Insurance Policies, General Liability 20 years after expiration
claims.
Record of safety violations discovered during inspection of school
18.54 Labor Citations - Safety Violations One year after resolution
facilities.
Records of all legal actions in which the school unit has been Until issue is resolved, plus 6
18.55 Legal Files
involved. years
Receipts for registered, certified or other mail sent out by a school
as well as undeliverable registered or certified mail items returned.
The records are typically filed with the school’s copy of the item
1 Year (unless needed longer
18.56 Mail Delivery and Receipt mailed. Including, but not limited to:
for legal purposes)
• Certified/registered/insured mail logs and return receipts;
• Private ground delivery registers/receipts
• Signed pick-up and delivery receipts

Local Government Schedules v.2 page 54
Series Series Title Description Retention
Documentation of final disposition of records, describing records
disposed of and manner and date of disposition; providing
18.57 Records Disposition Documentation Permanent
evidence that records have been disposed of per approved
retention schedules.
Reports Filed With Federal or State
18.58.a Interim or periodic reports used to create final reports. 6 years
Agencies – Interim Records/Reports
Reports Filed With Federal or State
18.58.b Final versions of reports. Permanent
Agencies – Annual/Final Report
Official school calendar for the school year. Includes approved and
18.59 School Calendar 10 years
revised calendars.
Records include emergency drills in school, as well as safe riding
18.60 Student Safety Drills 6 years
skills and emergency evaluation on school buses.
Retain until determined that no
Recordings which document the activities in public areas of school security incident has occurred,
18.61 Surveillance Records facilities used as a security measure in the identification of persons then destroy. If incident or
who cause disturbances or violate laws. investigation, retain until
resolved.
Municipal warrant used to call a town meeting, with associated
election notice. Warrants typically list an agenda of items to be
voted on by those present, which may be an open town meeting,
18.62 Warrants - Municipal (those present would consist of any and all registered voters in the Permanent
town) or a representative town meeting (anyone may attend, but
only town meeting members - elected representatives - are
allowed to vote).
Implementing plans; record of compliance with community
18.63 Wellness Program (School) involvement and notification requirements; triennial assessment 6 years
records.

Local Government Schedules v.2 page 55
Administrative Records – Property Records (facility/equipment/land)
Series Series Title Description Retention
Records of maintenance and improvements. Destroy records Life of facility (or as long as
18.64 Buildings and Grounds Records
when facility no longer exists, or transfer records to new owner. owned by school unit)
Deeds (plus any related documents) to a school unit’s real
Deeds to Properties Owned by Local
18.65 property. These deeds must also be recorded at the appropriate Permanent
Government Agencies
County Register's Office.
Depreciation schedules for non-real property owned by school 6 years after disposal of
18.66 Depreciation Schedules
units. property
Records relating to the inventorying of the school’s capital,
expendable and consumable assets. Updated when new items are
purchased and old items are sold or given away. Series may Retain for 4 fiscal years after
18.67 Equipment/Asset Inventory contain: Name of the asset, description, location, purchase date, date of inventory or until
serial or other identifying number, original cost and current value. disposition of asset
Also documents related to the purchase, upgrading, and
maintenance of equipment such as motor vehicles, computers, etc.
18.68 Equipment Maintenance Records Records of maintenance of school equipment. 3 years, plus current
“Real Property” related leases (land, buildings and fixtures) to
which the school unit is a party. Records may include: legal 10 years after termination of
18.69 Leases - Property
documents, correspondence, reports, etc., relating to the lease
negotiation, fulfillment, and termination of the lease.
Mortgages on property owned by school unit, and discharges of
18.70 Mortgages these mortgages. Must also be recorded at the appropriate Permanent
Registry of Deeds.
Other than deeds to real estate - documentation for purchase and
6 years after disposal of
18.71 Property Records maintenance of property that the school unit records on an
property
inventory.
Plans and related documents that provide history of school
Life of the building (or until no
18.72 School Construction Records construction projects. Destroy records when building no longer
longer owned by school unit)
exists, or transfer records to new owner.
Final plans submitted to planning boards and land use committees,
18.73.a Site Plans - Approved Permanent
approved to allow the work to proceed.
Plans superseded by subsequent changes in execution, and all
18.73.b Site Plans - Work in Progress sketches, notes, and supporting documents to completed (final) Until no longer needed
plan.

Local Government Schedules v.2 page 56
FINANCIAL RECORDS
Series Series Title Description Retention
Including but not limited to: claims, bills, invoices, statements,
copies of checks and purchase orders, expenditure authorizations,
Accounts Payable and Disbursement
18.74 and similar records that serve to document disbursements, 6 years
Records
including those documenting claims for and reimbursement to
employees for travel and other employment-related expenses.
Including but not limited to: bill copies or stubs, statements, billing
registers, account cards, direct deposits, cash receipts, credit card
receipts, receipt books, cash transfers, daily cash reports, cash
18.75 Accounts Receivable Records 6 years
drawer reconciliations, and similar records (such as returned
checks and associated fees) that serve to document money owed
to or received by a school unit and its collection or receipt.
18.76 Audit Reports Report issued by auditor following each official audit. Permanent
7 years
Calculations and other backup materials used by auditors to Title 20-A, Chapter 22, §6051
18.77 Audits, Internal (Working Papers)
generate final report. requires that school units keep
these records 7 years
Records relating to the school’s banking activities and
documenting its banking transactions including, but not limited to:
• Bank deposits (deposit slips) and withdrawals
18.78 Banking, Accounts and Transactions • Bank reconciliations and statements 6 years
• Records documenting the status of and adjustments to accounts
• Stop payment reports/requests (and supporting documentation)
• Canceled checks, or images of canceled checks
Bids and proposals made by potential vendors to provide the
school with goods, services, revenue, or other benefits. Including,
but not limited to:
• Request for proposal or bid, request for qualifications/quotations,
18.79.a Bids and Proposals, Successful 6 years
specifications, etc.;
• Public notices;
• Bid proposals, evaluation documents, statements of qualification,
applications, etc.

Local Government Schedules v.2 page 57
Series Series Title Description Retention
Bids and proposals made by potential vendors to provide the
school with goods, services, revenue, or other benefits, which are
18.79.b Bids and Proposals, Unsuccessful 2 years
not accepted. Includes bid proposals,evaluation documents,
statements of qualification, applications, etc.
18.80 Bond Records, Financial Bonds (financial, representing funds invested) purchased or sold. 6 years after expiration
Final copy of the adopted budget, listing anticipated revenues and
Budget Records - Approved Annual
18.81.a expenses for year. This series does NOT include working papers, Permanent
Budget
drafts, budget requests, or other supporting documentation.
Documentation supporting the approved annual budget, including
but not limited to working papers, agency staff analyses, drafts, or
Budget Records - Supporting
18.81.b other working documents used to draw up the final budget, 6 years
Documents
including estimates and requests submitted for compilation by
individual departments.
Contracts entered into by school unit for the purchase of goods,
18.82 Contracts/Leases 6 years after completion
services; leasing of vehicles, equipment, etc.
Records documenting the daily transactions concerning receipts
and disbursements of funds. May include details of daily receipts
and expenditures such as deposit or payment amounts, date,
18.83.a Ledgers/Journals - Daily Transactions 6 years
payee, purpose, fund credited or debited, and check number, etc..
These records are considered temporary accounting records which
are used to create a permanent ledger.
Summary accounting records, showing line item totals of income
18.83.b Ledgers/Journal - Permanent and expenditures for year. (May also be referred to as annual or Permanent
final fiscal reports.)
18.84 School Trust Fund Records Records of all trust funds supporting school. Permanent
18.85 Student Activity Accounts Records for funds collected to support student activities. 3 years
Official authorization (i.e. internal document) used in order to
collect and organize the necessary documentation and approvals
18.86 Vouchers before paying on a claim or bill. May include name of department 6 years
fund, check number, date, amount of claim, and authorizing
signature.
Warrants for payment of obligations, (i.e. a written order instructing
18.87 Warrants - Financial 6 years
a specific payment to a specified recipient at a specific time).

Local Government Schedules v.2 page 58
PAYROLL RECORDS
Series Series Title Description Retention
Records documenting an individual employee's authorization to
3 years after separation
18.88 Deduction Authorizations withhold taxes or other authorization to allow deductions from the
employee's pay.
until superseded or end of
This record series documents an employee's authorization for
18.89 Direct Deposit Authorization employment
direct deposit of their paycheck in the bank.
Records kept for individual employee earnings history. May
contain, but not limited to: salary history, department and position, 60 years after separation
18.90 Employee Payroll Records
earnings and deductions by pay period; gross earnings year-to-
date, net pay.
Earnings and withholdings of employees for each pay period; used
to compile the year end Payroll Register. Records include: date, 6 years
18.91.a Payroll Register – Pay Period
employee names, gross pay, withholdings and deductions, pay
rate
Registers, reports, or similar records detailing the cumulative or 60 years after separation
18.91.b Payroll Register - Year End
year-to-date earnings, withholdings, and deductions.
Various reports are generated for each pay cycle to verify the
accuracy of the payroll. These reports may include payroll
6 years
18.92 Payroll Reports summaries, pay journals, check registers, account distributions,
payroll liabilities, payroll transactions, payroll account creation
reports, gross pay balance, deduction registers, etc.
Pension or retirement account records that detail, by pay period
and cumulatively, deductions, disbursements, adjustments, or 60 years after retirement
18.93 Pension or Retirement Records
other actions. (May be considered as part of Employee Payroll
Records or Personnel File)
Forms and reports used to report the collection, distribution,
deposit, and transmittal of payroll and other tax related information
6 years after fiscal reporting
for employees. Including: W-2 or W-3, Wage & Tax Statement;
18.94 Tax Forms year
W-4, Employees Withholding; Form 940, Unemployment Tax;
Form 941, Quarterly Tax; 1099 Forms, Miscellaneous income or
other distributions
Garnishment of employee wages. Records may include: child
support records, bankruptcy records, tax levies, and any other 6 years after file becomes
18.95 Wage Attachments/Garnishments court-ordered garnishments or voluntary attachments stating the inactive
total amount to be collected and the amount to be deducted from
each payroll.

Local Government Schedules v.2 page 59
PERSONNEL RECORDS
Series Series Title Description Retention
3 years
18.96 Attendance Records Attendance records if not covered by other record series.
Applications for Employment - Not
18.97 Cover letters, application forms, references, etc. 2 years
Hired
18.98 Background Checks Background checks conducted by school unit. 6 years
5 years
18.99 Employee Drug Tests Records of drug test and results for school employees.
Records regarding employee participation in insurance programs
18.100 Employee Insurance 6 years after termination
(such as health, dental, etc., and including COBRA records)
60 years after separation
unless employer has been
Employment history (including dates of employment, annual salary notified that the former
18.101 Employment History
history, full time/part time status). employee has died; in which
case 10 years after former
employee's death
Federally required proof that employee has a legal right to work in
18.102 Form I-9 3 years after separation
the U.S.
Health records of school employees, individuals visited by
30 years after separation
18.103 Health Records - Individuals municipal nurses, etc. Does not include records maintained by
government-operated hospitals or similar health care facilities.
Description of duties performed or to be performed by particular
18.104 Job Descriptions Permanent
positions.
Requests and authorizations for vacation, compensatory, sick,
18.105 Leave Files Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA), and other types of 3 years
authorized leave, and supporting documentation.
18.106 Personnel Records – Long Term Personnel records addressed in 20-A M.R.S.A, Section 6101. 6 years after separation

Local Government Schedules v.2 page 60
Series Series Title Description Retention
Reports and regulatory statistics maintained for State or Federal
18.107 State and Federal Personnel Reports agencies (such as affirmative action and equal opportunity 6 years
records, OSHA-required records, etc.)
List of school unit's employment of substitute teachers to cover
18.108 Substitute List 1 year, plus current
teacher absences.
Information used to conduct training sessions or for conferences
Training – Conferences, Workshops and workshops. May include training materials, registration and 3 years after end of
18.109.a
Conducted by Agency confirmation records, flyers and/or brochures, other presentation training/event
material or related documentation.
Employee records for any voluntary or mandatory training
provided in-house or by another organization. Records may
18.109.b Training - Employee Training 6 years after separation
include certificates of completion (such as Freedom of Access –
Right to Know), grades and requests and approval for training.
Training and education of employees: Information about available
18.109.c Training – Informational Materials Update as needed
training/education opportunities.
Related correspondence; union grievances and negotiation
Union Records - Grievance and documentation; signature page of people attending meeting; notes
18.110.a 50 years
Arbitration Files on meeting; written decision; demand for arbitration; arbitration
award; exhibits; briefs; notice of hearing; settlement agreement.
Union Records - Union Agreements Collective bargaining agreements with unions representing
18.110.b Permanent
(Signed) employees of school unit.
Records documenting those who participate as school volunteers.
These records are maintained as a reference and to verify that a
person has worked as a volunteer. May contain: Application,
18.111 Volunteer Records 5 years
names of volunteers, addresses, directory information, program
volunteering for, time and attendance records, registers, sign-in
sheets and activity information.
Records of individual employee participation in program designed Current year
18.112 Wellness Program Records (Employee)
to encourage behaviors thought to result in improved heath.
Workers Compensation Records - First report plus other records, when claim is finalized by a lump 1 year after close of case
18.113.a
Completed Claim sum settlement.
Workers Compensation Records - First No lost work time, so that the only record required is the initial 1 year after close of case
18.113.b
Report of Injury report of injury.
Workers Compensation Records - Long First report plus other records where time is lost from work and 20 years after last payment
18.113.c
Term Claim case is not finalized by lump sum payment.

Local Government Schedules v.2 page 61
School Board Records
Series Series Title Description Retention
Comprehensive Emergency Title 20-A §1001 requires that each school board annually approve
18.114 5 years after each revision
Management Plan this plan.
These records document the plans for the future growth and
development of the school system. A comprehensive, long-range
18.115 Comprehensive Plans (Adopted) Permanent
general plan addresses present and future needs of the school;
including any future growth and development.
18.116 School Board Accreditation Reports Accreditation reports. Permanent
18.117 School Board Committee Minutes Approved minutes of school board sub-committees. Permanent
All official meetings held or conducted by School Board, where
official minutes are kept with an accurate record of votes and
actions. Includes, but is not limited to:
 Agendas, meeting/agenda packets (briefs, reference
materials, etc.)
 Speaker sign-up, written testimony Permanent (except where
18.118 School Board Meeting Minutes
 Audio/visual recording transcripts noted)
 Recordings (destroy after minutes have been transcribed
and approved, unless challenge or legal dispute related to
meeting, then retain until resolution.
 Minutes (any handwritten notes, once transcribed and
approved can be destroyed)
Approved Board policies, including policies removed/rescinded by
18.119 School Board Policies Permanent
the Board.