SOURCE: https://www.rsu5.org/fs/resource-manager/view/5c48d2e3-3adc-436c-ad53-5152e36703f6
SECTION: /board-of-directors-and-policies/adopted-policies-and-procedures
TITLE: JLCD-R2-Medication Procedures for Administering Medication to Students
TYPE: Finalsite-PDF
============================================================

Code: JLCD-R2
MEDICATION PROCEDURES FOR ADMINISTERING MEDICATION TO STUDENTS
The following administrative procedures are necessary to implement the school policy for
Administering Medication to Students (NEPN/NSBA Code: JLCD) and required by the Maine
Department of Education Rules for Medication Administration in schools. The intent of the
policy (NEPN/NSBA Code: JLCD) and this procedure is to:
A. Promote the safe administration of medications to students by school personnel
B. Provide direction for training of unlicensed school personnel in the administration of
medication.
C. Provide authorization to allow students to carry and self-administer prescribed emergency
medications such as asthma inhalers or epinephrine auto-injectors with health care provider
approval and school nurse assessment of competency.
DEFINITIONS:
“Administration” means the provision of prescribed medication to a student according to the
orders of a healthcare provider.
“Asthma inhaler” is a device for the delivery of prescribed asthma medication which is inhaled.
It includes metered dose inhalers, dry powder inhalers and nebulizers.
“Epinephrine auto injector” is a device to deliver the correct epinephrine dose parenterally and
is used as a treatment for symptoms of an allergic reaction.
“Health care provider” means a medical/health practitioner who has a current license in the
State of Maine with a scope of practice that includes prescribing medication.
“Indirect supervision” means the supervision of an unlicensed school staff member when the
school nurse or other health care provider is not physically available on site but immediately
available by telephone.
“Medication” means prescribed drugs and medical devices that are controlled by the U.S. Food
and Drug Administration and are ordered by a healthcare provider. It includes over-the-counter
medications prescribed through a standing order by the school physician or prescribed by the
student’s health care provider.
“Medication Error” occurs when a medication is not administered as prescribed. This includes
when the medication prescribed is not given to the correct student, at the correct time, in the
dosage prescribed, by the correct route, or when the medication administered is not the correct
medication.
“Parent” means a natural or adoptive parent, a guardian, or a person acting as a parent of a child
with legal responsibility for the child’s welfare.
“School nurse” means a registered professional nurse with Maine Department of Education
certification for school nursing.
“Self-administration” is when the student administers medication independently to him/herself
under indirect supervision of the school nurse.
“Training for Unlicensed School Personnel” means the organized and systematic education of
unlicensed school personnel who will administer medications to students.
“Unlicensed School Personnel” are persons who do not have a professional license that allows
them, within the scope of that license, to administer medication.
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 1 of 7

Code: JLCD-R2
School nurses are responsible for their own actions in the administration of medications.
● The school nurse will provide direction and oversight for the administration of medication in
the school, under the administrative supervision of the superintendent.
● The school nurse will provide coordination and oversight of unlicensed school personnel who
administer medication to students.
● It is the responsibility of the school nurse to clarify any medication order which they believe
to be inappropriate or ambiguous. In accordance with Department of Education Rule
Chapter 40&2(B), the school nurse has the right and responsibility to decline to administer
medication if they believe it would jeopardize student safety. In this case, the nurse must
notify the parent, the student’s health care provider and the school administrator.
SCHOOL PERSONNEL AUTHORIZED TO ADMINISTER MEDICATIONS:
● Medications may be administered during the school day by licensed medical personnel acting
within the scope of their licenses.
● All unlicensed school personnel (E.g. principals, teachers, ed techs, school secretaries,
coaches, bus drivers) who administer medication must be trained before being authorized to
do so.
● Based upon the documentation of training and competency in the administration of
medication, the school nurse will make recommendations to the Superintendent/designee
pertaining to authorization of unlicensed persons to administer medication.
● Training that shall be acceptable for the purpose of authorization of unlicensed personnel is
addressed under the section of this procedure titled, “Required Training of Unlicensed
Personnel to Administer Medication”.
CONFIDENTIALITY:
To the extent legally permissible, staff members may be provided with such information
regarding medication and its administration as may be in the best interest of the student.
MEDICATION REQUEST/PERMISSION:
● In certain instances where no other options exist, and it is essential for a student to receive
medication while attending school, a parent/legal guardian may make a request in writing.
● The written Medication Request/Permission Form will include an acknowledgement and
agreement that trained unlicensed school personnel may administer the medication as per the
health care provider’s order. Inform the parent that the medication may be administered by
trained unlicensed school personnel.
● The request will indicate that information regarding the student’s medication may be shared
with appropriate school personnel.
PARENT RESPONSIBILITY:
It is the responsibility of the parent to provide the school with the following before medication is
administered to a student:
1. A current written Medication Request/Permission Form must be completed by the parent
for any medication administered to a student.
2. A current written order must be obtained from the health care provider.
3. The first dose of a newly prescribed medication should be given at home.
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 2 of 7

Code: JLCD-R2
4. Medication must be in the original container, properly labeled; a duplicate labeled bottle
may be obtained from the pharmacy.
5. Medication will be delivered to school by the parent or adult designee; the parent will
replenish the medication kept at school.
6. Parent will inform the school nurse of changes in the student’s health status.
7. Parent is responsible for notifying the school of any changes in or discontinuation of a
prescribed medication that is being administered at school.
8. Parent must remove any medication no longer required or that remains at the end of the
school year.
9. Written parental permission forms must be renewed at least annually (each school year);
and whenever there are changes in the physician orders.
HEALTH CARE PROVIDER WRITTEN ORDER:
A current written order from the prescribing health care provider for any medication
administered at school must include:
1. The student’s name
2. The name of the medication
3. The dose
4. The route of administration
5. Time intervals to be given
6. Any special instructions
7. The name of the prescribing licensed health care provider
● A medication label that provides sufficient information may be used in lieu of a written order
unless the medication is to be administered for more than 15 consecutive days.
● Written health care provider orders must be renewed at least annually, or whenever the
physician changes the orders.
RENEWAL OF PARENTAL REQUESTS & HEALTH CARE PROVIDER ORDERS:
Written parental request/permission forms must be renewed at least annually (each school year);
and whenever there are changes in the physician orders.
DELIVERY AND STORAGE OF MEDICATION:
● The student’s parents shall deliver any medication to be administered by school personnel to
the school in its original container.
● In the event that this is not practical, the parent must contact the school to make alternate
arrangements.
● No more than a 20-day (one month) supply of a Schedule II Medication shall be kept at
school, excluding inhalers and epinephrine pens.
● Medications regulated by the Federal Narcotics Act will not be accepted at school unless it's
a part of a student individual health plan agreed upon by the physician, parent, school nurse
and administrator. If the health care provider’s order/prescription is for a medication
regulated by the Federal Narcotics Act, no more than a one week supply shall be kept at
school, with the exception of controlled substances designated for the treatment of ADHD in
which case, no more than a 20 day supply shall be kept at school.
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 3 of 7

Code: JLCD-R2
● All medications regulated by the Federal Narcotics Act will be stored in a double lock
cabinet.
● The designated school official shall be responsible for developing and implementing
procedures for the appropriate and secure storage of medications kept at school, and all
medications shall be stored in accordance with this procedure.
● Medications that are not picked up by parents at the end of each school year will be
appropriately discarded. The school nurse will utilize a mail bag designated for medications
to Maine DEA in the appropriate containers or utilize a local medication disposal site.
RECORDKEEPING:
● School personnel and the student’s parent/guardian shall account for all medication brought
to school. The number of capsules, pills or tablets, and/or the volume of other medications
brought to school shall be recorded on the “Medication Administration Record.”
● School staff administering medication shall document each instance the medication is
administered including the date, time and dosage given on the “Medication Administration
Record.”
● The designated school official shall maintain a record including the parent’s
permission/request, physician’s order, details of the specific medications (including dosage
and timing of medication), and documentation of each instance the medication is
administered. Number of pills will be counted before and after administration.
● Records shall be retained according to the current State schedules pertaining to student health
records.
● A “Medication Error Report” will be completed when a medication is not administered as
prescribed. This includes when the medication prescribed is not given to the correct student,
at the correct time, in the dosage prescribed, by the correct route or when the medication
administered is not the correct medication. In the case of a medication error, the parent will
be notified, the school nurse and the principal.
STUDENT SELF-ADMINISTRATION OF MEDICATION:
Students may be authorized by the school nurse to possess and self-administer medication during
the school day, during curriculum-based excursions, school-sponsored events, or while on a
school bus. The student shall be authorized to carry and self-administer medication if the
following conditions have been met:
1. The parent/guardian (or student, if 18 years of age or older) must request in writing
authorization for the student to self-administer medication.
2. The student must have the prior written approval of their primary health care provider
and, if the student is under the age of 18, the prior written approval of their parent/guardian. The
written notice from the student’s primary care provider must specify the name and dosage of the
medication, frequency with which it may be administered, and the circumstances that may
warrant its use.
3. The student’s parent/guardian must submit written verification to the school from the
student’s primary care provider confirming that the student has the knowledge and the skills to
safely carry and self-administer medication.
4. The school nurse shall evaluate the student’s knowledge and skills to self-administer,
taking into account the maturity and capability of the student and the circumstances under which
the student will or may have to self-administer the medication.
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 4 of 7

Code: JLCD-R2
5. The parent will be informed that the school cannot accurately monitor the frequency and
appropriateness of use when the student self-administers medication, and that the school unit will
not be responsible for any injury arising from the student’s self medication.
● A student’s authorization to possess and self-administer medication may be limited or
revoked by the building principal after consultation with the school nurse and the students’
parents if the student demonstrates inability to responsibly possess and self-administer such
medication.
● To the extent legally permissible, staff members may be provided with such information
regarding the student’s medication and the student’s self administration as may be in the best
interest of the student.
● Sharing, borrowing or distribution of medication is prohibited. The student’s authorization to
self-administer the medication may be revoked and the student may be subject to disciplinary
consequences for violation of this policy.
FIELD TRIPS AND SCHOOL SPONSORED EVENTS
ADMINISTRATION OF MEDICATION DURING OFF-CAMPUS FIELD TRIPS AND
SCHOOL SPONSORED EVENTS:
The school will accommodate students requiring administration of medication during field trips
or school-sponsored events as follows:
● The school nurse, principal, and as appropriate, the school’s Section 504 and/or IEP
Coordinator, will determine whether an individual student’s participation is contraindicated
due to the unstable/fragile nature of their health condition, the distance from emergency care
that may be required and/or other extraordinary circumstances. The student’s parent and
primary care provider will be consulted in making this determination. The decision will be
made in compliance with applicable laws, including the IDEA, 504 and the Americans with
Disabilities Act (ADA).
● The parent/guardian must provide the appropriate number of doses needed for the duration of
the field trip or school-sponsored event.
● When there are no contraindications to student participation, an appropriately trained staff
member will be assigned to administer medication. The parent will be encouraged to
accompany the student, if possible, to care for the student and administer medication. All
provisions of this policy shall apply to medications to be administered during off-campus
field trips and school sponsored events. JLCD-R1 Medication Administration on School
Field Trips will be followed.
REQUIRED TRAINING OF UNLICENSED SCHOOL PERSONNEL TO ADMINISTER
MEDICATION:
Any unlicensed school personnel who administer medication to a student in a school setting (at
school, on school transportation to or from school, on field trips, or during school-sponsored
events) must be trained in the administration of medication before being authorized to carry out
this responsibility.
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 5 of 7

Code: JLCD-R2
Training for unlicensed school personnel must be provided by a registered professional nurse or
a physician. The training on administration of medication must include the following
components:
1. Current laws and school policies related to medication administration.
2. Resources available to staff regarding medication administration.
3. Basic anatomy of routes of medication (gastro-intestinal route, lung, ear, eye and nose).
4. Basic classification of medications.
5. Common medications with side effects.
6. How to read a medication label.
7. How to document medications administered and medication errors.
8. The five rights of medication administration (right student, right medication, right dose,
right time and right route).
9. Procedure/protocols for administering medications
10. Signs and symptoms of adverse effects
11. Responding to emergencies
12. Working with parents
13. Protecting the confidentiality of student health information
● The trainer shall document the training and the competency of school personnel trained.
Based upon the documentation of training and competency of unlicensed personnel to
administer medication, the school nurse shall make a recommendation to the Superintendent
concerning the authorization of such persons to administer medication to students.
● School personnel trained in the administration of fluoride as part of the Oral Health Program
are exempt from this rule for the administration of fluoride.
● Following the initial training, a training review and information update must be held at least
annually for unlicensed school personnel authorized to administer medication.
DELEGATION AND IMPLEMENTATION:
The Superintendent/designee shall be responsible for developing administrative procedures
and/or protocols to implement or supplement the policy (NEPN/NSBA Code: JLCD). Such
procedures/protocols shall include:
● Safe transport of medication to and from school
● Administration of medication during field trips and school-sponsored events
● Accountability for medications, particularly those regulated by the Federal Narcotics Act
● Proper storage of medication at school
● Training of appropriate staff on administration of emergency medications.
● The procedure to follow in the event of a medication reaction
● Access to medications in case of disaster
● The process for documenting medications given and medication errors
● The proper disposal of medications not retrieved by parents.
Legal Reference:
20-A M.R.S.A. && 254; 4009(4)
Chap 40 (Maine Department of Education Rule)
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 6 of 7

Code: JLCD-R2
28 C.F.R. Part 35 (Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990)
34 C.F.R. Part 104 (Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973)
34 C.F.R. Part 300 (Individuals with Disabilities Act)
Administrative Procedure Adopted: 10/4/11
Reviewed: 11/22/22
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 7 of 7