SOURCE: https://www.rsu5.org/fs/resource-manager/view/54dcff7a-0c90-47be-a032-95c44ead2eaa
SECTION: /board-of-directors-and-policies/adopted-policies-and-procedures
TITLE: JRA-R-Student Education Records.pdf
TYPE: Finalsite-PDF
============================================================

NEPN/NSBA Code: JRA-R
STUDENT EDUCATION RECORDS AND INFORMATION
ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE
This administrative procedure is intended to assist administrators and school staff in complying
with the requirements of federal and state statutes and regulations concerning student education
records and information, including special education requirements.
A. Definitions
The following definitions apply to terms used in this procedure.
1. “Act” means the federal Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (20 U.S.C.
§1232g).
2. “Directory information” means the following information contained in an
education record of a student: name, participation and grade level of students in
officially recognized activities and sports, height and weight of student athletes,
dates of attendance in the school unit, and honors and awards received.
3. “Eligible student” means a student who has attained 18 years of age who has not
been judged by a court of competent jurisdiction to be so severely impaired that
the student is unable to make decisions or exercise judgment on his/her own
behalf. When a student attains the age of 18, all rights accorded to parents
concerning education records transfer to the eligible student.
4. “Parent” means parent, regardless of divorce or separation, a legal guardian, or
individual acting as a parent or guardian provided that there shall be a
presumption that a parent has the authority to exercise the rights governing such
matters as divorce, separation or custody or a legally binding instrument that
specifically revokes such rights.
5. “Education Record” means information or data that directly relates to a student
and is maintained by the school unit in any medium, including but not limited to
handwriting, print, computer media, video or audio tape, microfilm and
microfiche. Records of instructional, supervisory and administrative personnel
and personnel who support these individuals,
which are in the sole possession of the maker thereof and which are not accessible
or revealed to any other person except a temporary substitute for the person who
made the record are excluded from this definition.
6. “Student” includes any individual with respect to whom the school unit maintains
education records.
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 1 of 7

NEPN/NSBA Code: JRA-R
B. Notification
Parents and eligible students shall be provided with notice of their rights under FERPA
and other applicable federal and state laws and regulations concerning education records
at the beginning of each school year or upon enrollment if a student enrolls after the start
of the school year. RSU No. 5 may provide notice through any of the following means:
1. Mailing to students’ homes;
2. Distribution to students to take home;
3. Publication in student handbooks; and
4. Publication in newsletters or other materials distributed to each parent/ eligible
student.
C. Access to Policy and Administrative Procedures
RSU No. 5’s policy on Student Education Records and Student Information shall be
posted in each school. In addition, school administrators shall provide copies of this
administrative procedure to parents/eligible students upon request.
D. Inspection and Review of Education Records
Parents/eligible students may review and inspect their educational records by the
following procedure:
1. The parent/eligible student must make a written request to the Superintendent or
building administrator to review the records.
2. The Superintendent or building administrator will comply with the request
without unnecessary delay and in a reasonable period of time,
but in no case more than 45 days after it received the request, and will comply
before any IEP Team meeting regarding an Individualized Education Program or
any due process hearing relating to the identification, evaluation, or placement of
the student.
3. The Superintendent or building administrator may deny a request for access to or
copies of the student's education records if there is reasonable doubt as to the
legality of the parent-child relationship. Access will be withheld until a
determination of legal right to access can be established.
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 2 of 7

NEPN/NSBA Code: JRA-R
Parents/eligible students may also request to review the following:
1. RSU No. 5’s list of types and locations of all records and titles of officials
responsible for the records; and
2. RSU No. 5’s record of disclosures of personally identifiable information (see
following section).
E. Requests to Amend Education Records
Parents/eligible students may ask RSU No. 5 to amend education records they believe are
inaccurate, misleading or in violation of the student’s privacy rights as follows:
1. The parent/eligible student must make a written request to the Superintendent or
building administrator to amend the education record. The request must clearly
identify the part of the record they want changed, and specify why it is inaccurate
or misleading.
2. The Superintendent or building administrator shall, within a reasonable period of
time after receipt of the request, either amend the record in accordance with the
request or inform the parent/eligible student of its refusal to amend the record and
inform the parent/eligible student of their right to request a hearing.
3. If the parent/eligible student requests a hearing, it shall be held within a
reasonable period of time from RSU No. 5’s receipt of the written request. The
parent/eligible student shall be given advance notice of the date, place, and time
of the hearing. The Superintendent shall designate an individual to conduct the
hearing. This individual may be an employee of RSU No. 5 so long as he/she
does not have a direct interest in the outcome of the hearing. The parent/eligible
student shall be afforded a full and fair opportunity to present evidence relevant to
the issues raised and may be assisted or represented by individuals of his/her
choice at his/her own expense, including an attorney.
4. RSU No. 5 shall make its decision in writing within a reasonable period of time.
The decision of the school shall include a summary of the evidence and the
reasons for the decision.
5. If, as a result of the hearing, RSU No. 5 decides that the information is inaccurate,
misleading or otherwise in violation of the privacy rights of the student, it shall
amend the education records of the student accordingly and so inform the
parent/eligible student in writing.
6. If, as a result of the hearing, RSU No. 5 decides that the information is not
inaccurate, misleading or otherwise in violation of the privacy rights of the
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 3 of 7

NEPN/NSBA Code: JRA-R
student, it shall inform the parent/eligible student of their right to include a
statement in the student’s education record about the contested information and/or
setting forth any reasons for disagreeing with the decision of RSU No. 5
7. Any statement placed in the student’s education record under the preceding
paragraph shall be maintained as long as the record or contested portion is
maintained by RSU No. 5 If the education records of the student or the contested
portion is disclosed by the School Department to any party, the explanation shall
also be disclosed.
F. Disclosure of Education Records
All disclosures of education records will be made in compliance with federal and state
statutes and regulations. The School Department will maintain a record of disclosures of
personally identifiable information from the education records of a student. Such records
do not include disclosures to the parents/eligible student, disclosures made pursuant to
written consent of the parents/eligible student, disclosures to school officials or
disclosures of directory information. The School Department will not disclose any
personally identifiable information from the education records of a student without the
prior written consent of the parent/eligible student. The written consent shall include a
specification of the records that may be disclosed, the purpose(s) of the disclosure(s), and
the identity of the party or parties to whom the disclosure(s) may be made.
There are several exceptions to the requirement to obtain prior written consent before
disclosing education records as follows:
1. Directory Information. RSU No. 5 may make directory information (as
described in the Definitions section) public at its discretion unless a
parent/eligible student has notified the Superintendent in writing by September 15
or within thirty (30) days of enrollment, whichever is later.
RSU No. 5 may disclose directory information about former students without the
consent of the parent/eligible student.
2. Military Recruiters/Institutions of Higher Education. Military recruiters and
institutions of higher education are entitled to receive the names, addresses and
telephone numbers of secondary students and RSU No. 5 must comply with any
such request, provided that parents have been notified of their right to request that
this information not be released without their prior written consent.
Parents/eligible students who do not want RSU No. 5 to disclose this information
must notify the Superintendent in writing by September 15th or within thirty (30)
days of enrollment, whichever is later.
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 4 of 7

NEPN/NSBA Code: JRA-R
3. School Officials with Legitimate Educational Interests. Education records
may be disclosed to school officials with a “legitimate educational interest.” A
school official has a legitimate educational interest if he/she needs to review an
education record in order to fulfill his/her professional responsibility. School
officials include persons employed by RSU No. 5 as an administrator, supervisor,
instructor, or support staff member (including health or medical staff and the
school unit’s designated law enforcement unit personnel, if any); members of the
Board of Education; persons or companies with whom RSU No. 5 has contracted
to provide specific services (such as attorneys, auditors, medical consultants,
evaluators or therapists); and parents, students or volunteers serving on an official
committee (such as a disciplinary or grievance committee) or assisting a school
official in performing his/her professional responsibilities.
4. Other School Units. Under Maine law (20-A M.R.S.A. § 6001-B), RSU No. 5 is
required to send a student’s education records to a school unit to which a student
applies for transfer, including disciplinary records,
attendance records, special education records and health records. Consent is not
required for the transfer of these records, except for confidential health records.
At the request of the Superintendent of the school unit where a student seeks
admission, the student's current or former school administrators shall provide, in a
timely fashion, an oral or written report to the Superintendent indicating whether
the student has been expelled or suspended or is the subject of an expulsion or
suspension proceeding.
5. Other Entities/Individuals. Education records may be disclosed to other
governmental entities, agencies and individuals as specifically permitted by
FERPA and the accompanying regulations.
6. Information on the Internet. Under Maine law (20-A M.R.S.A. § 6001), the
School Department shall not publish on the Internet any information that
identifies a student, including but not limited to the student’s full name,
photograph, personal biography, e-mail address, home address, date of birth,
social security number and parents’ names, without written parental consent.
G. Waiver of Confidentiality Rights
A parent/eligible student may waive any of his/her rights regarding confidentiality of
educational records, but any such a waiver must be in writing and signed by the
parent/eligible student. The school may not require that a parent/eligible student waive
his or her rights. Any waiver may be revoked with respect to actions occurring after the
revocation. If a parent executes a waiver, that waiver may be revoked by the student any
time after he/she becomes an eligible student.
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 5 of 7

NEPN/NSBA Code: JRA-R
H. Fees for Copying Records
There shall be no charge to search for or retrieve education records of a student. RSU No.
5 shall provide copies of education records to parents/eligible students upon request. The
cost of producing copies of the record to parents/eligible student will be $.20 per page
copied, plus postage. Parents/eligible students who are unable to pay such fees will not
be denied access to education records. This fee, however, will not prohibit a parent's or
eligible student's opportunity for access to the records if they are unable to pay for such
copies. There will be no charge to search for or to retrieve the education records of a
student.
I. Maintenance and Destruction of Education Records
RSU No. 5 shall maintain accurate and up-to-date education records as required by
federal and state statutes and regulations.
1. Records shall be maintained by personnel who are knowledgeable about the
applicable confidentiality. All records shall be safeguarded from unauthorized
access. Student records must be kept in fireproof storage at the school or a
duplicate set kept off-site.
2. The high school transcripts of all former students shall be kept in perpetuity by
RSU No. 5 A permanent record of a special education student’s name, address,
phone number, grades, attendance record, classes attended, and grade and year
completed shall be maintained without time limitations. All other records will be
maintained in accordance with Maine State Rules for Disposition of Local
Governmental Records (Schedule L).
3. RSU No. 5 shall not destroy any education record if there is any outstanding
request to inspect or review such records.
4. Records of access to education records shall be retained as long as the records
themselves.
5. RSU No. 5 shall inform parents of students with disabilities when education
records are no longer needed to provide educational services to the student or to
demonstrate that the school has provided the student with a free appropriate
public education as required by law. At that point, the records may be turned
over to parents/eligible student upon their request, or destroyed in accordance
with the parent’s request or school unit procedures.
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 6 of 7

NEPN/NSBA Code: JRA-R
J. Complaints
The United States Department of Education maintains an office that handles complaints
about alleged violations of FERPA by local school units. Complaints regarding
violations of rights accorded parents/eligible students may be submitted in writing to:
Family Policy Compliance Office
Department of Education
400 Maryland Avenue, S.W.
Washington, D.C. 20202
Legal Reference: 20 U.S.C. § 1232g; 34 C.F.R. Part 99
20 U.S.C. § 7908
20-A M.R.S.A. § 6001, 6001-B
Me. Dept. of Ed. Rules, Ch. 101, 125
Maine State Archives, Rules for Disposition of Local
Governmental Records (Schedule L)
Administrative Procedure Adopted: 11/10/09
Administrative Procedure Revised: 11/22/11
Administrative Procedure Revised: 12/20/16
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 7 of 7