SOURCE: https://www.rsu5.org/fs/resource-manager/view/ad578a5f-32da-49bc-92ee-8d463ceb4a0d
SECTION: /board-of-directors-and-policies/adopted-policies-and-procedures
TITLE: KF-R2-Guidelines for School Use of the Freeport Performing Arts Center
TYPE: Finalsite-PDF
============================================================

NEPN/NSBA CODE: KF-R2
GUIDELINES FOR SCHOOL USE OF
THE FREEPORT PERFORMING ARTS CENTER
RSU5 Policy KF-R1 states:
FPAC’s bookings and day-to-day operations are conducted in such a way as to attain the
maximum and highest-best usage of the facility. It is the job of the FPAC Manager to
coordinate RSU5 use efficiently, maximizing the remaining available time to be used for
community and income-producing events.
All bookings of the FPAC (The Theater, Chorus Room, Band Room Lobby, Dressing
Room, and Box- Office/Concessions) will be scheduled in a way that makes FPAC
available for use in the following order of priority:
1. Freeport High School events
2. Other RSU5 School events
3. Non – RSU5 Events
Note: Whenever FPAC is confirmed-booked by a non-school client, that client may elect
to book the Concessions Area as an add-on feature thereby making it unavailable for
school use at that time.
A. Booking – Day / Night / School / Non School
A request for use should then be made to the FPAC Manager.
The FPAC Manager will be responsible for scheduling and managing usage of the
Freeport Performing Arts Center facility and equipment for school activities during
the school day and for evening school music events. The FPAC Manager will
coordinate all daytime school use of the facility with the building administrator.
The FPAC Manager will be responsible for scheduling and managing usage of the
Freeport Performing Arts Center facility and equipment during non-school hours.
B. Order of Prioritized School Use of FPAC:
The FPAC Manager, in order to attain the highest and best use of the facilities, will
consider the following order of prioritized use when scheduling. This order of use
acts as a guide, with any disputes resolved and final decisions made jointly by the
FPAC Manager and the RSU5 Superintendent.
1. FHS Performing Arts Classes
2. FHS Performing Arts Curricular Event (Band/Choral concerts, Drama Class
presentation)
3. FHS Performing Arts Co-Curricular Event (Musical, One Acts)
4. FHS Performing Arts Rehearsal (week of show/concert only)
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 1 of 6

NEPN/NSBA CODE: KF-R2
5. FHS Curricular Assembly or Auditorium Use (Senior Projects, school-wide
assemblies, etc.)
6. RSU Performing Arts Curricular Event (Band/Choral concerts)
7. FHS Co- or Extra-Curricular Assembly or Auditorium Use (JMG Induction,
awards assemblies, Guidance events, etc.)
8. RSU Performing Arts Co-Curricular Event
9. RSU Curricular Assembly or Auditorium Use (school-wide assemblies)
10. RSU Co- or Extra-Curricular Assembly or Auditorium Use (awards assemblies,
guidance events, etc.
11. FHS School-Related Performing Arts Events (events sponsored by boosters,
parent groups, etc.)
12. RSU School-Related Performing Arts Events (events sponsored by boosters,
parent groups, etc.)
13. FHS School-related Assembly or Auditorium Use (events sponsored by boosters,
parent groups, etc.)
14. RSU School-related Assembly or Auditorium Use (events sponsored by boosters,
parent groups, etc.)
C. Bumpable:
The term ‘bumpable’ means that an already-scheduled event can be displaced
according to certain guidelines. This practice is only used in an effort to “attain the
maximum and highest and best use” of the FPAC facilities. Once an event has been
scheduled, any event is considered ‘bumpable’ with the exception of Uses 1, 2 and 3
above. In order to be considered ‘bumpable’ however, the following criteria must be
met:
● Student needs are always considered first in the request to ‘bump.’
● The event proposing to bump an already scheduled event must supersede the
scheduled event on the Order of Prioritized Use above.
● The event proposing to bump an already scheduled event must require a
minimum of 100 seats.
● The event proposing to bump an already scheduled event must make the
request at least 60 calendar days prior to the requested date.
● FPAC Manager must be able to secure another facility within RSU5 facilities
to adequately and appropriately accommodate the bumped event.
Any event that requests to bump Uses 1, 2 or 3 will be considered ONLY if:
● Student needs are considered first priority.
● All teachers affected are included in the discussion of the request.
● Appropriate alternate teaching and/or performance space can be secured for
the affected students and teachers.
● The event creating the ‘bump’ provides necessary manpower to move, set, and
then reset all required equipment necessary to continue uninterrupted
curricular and student/teacher needs.
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 2 of 6

NEPN/NSBA CODE: KF-R2
D. Use of technical systems
FPAC, including all technical systems (sound, lights, etc.) must be under the control
of qualified personnel (Approved House-Tech(s)) at all times. Technical expertise
required will vary from event to event depending on the particular needs.
The FPAC Manager will consult with each User during the booking process to help
schedule appropriate House-Tech(s). All Users (anyone either school related or
non-school related) are required to have appropriately trained house techs to run
their event.
E. User fees
User Fees - House Tech and Janitorial Fees – may be charged as noted in KF-R1.
The following school-related users will NOT be charged any user fees:
● FHS Performing Arts Classes
● FHS Performing Arts Curricular Events
● FHS school-day events
● RSU5 Professional Development activities
The following school-related users MAY be charged house tech fees:
● FHS evening Co-Curricular and Extra-Curricular events.
● FHS Non-Performing Arts evening Curricular Assembly or Auditorium Use
● RSU5 Performing Arts Curricular Events
The following school-related users MAY be charged house tech and janitorial fees:
● All other uses not included above.
F. Guidelines for use
If the event is scheduled during the school day, all non- FHS employees,
●
performers and/or volunteers must check in at the FHS main office.
● All FPAC and school safety guidelines must be followed at all times (see
Appendix A).
G. Use Restrictions
The following activities are to be permitted only with express permission of
Management:
● Events to continue past 10pm.
● Any signs or posters to be hung anywhere in the FPAC including the lobby
area and on the entry-doors.
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 3 of 6

NEPN/NSBA CODE: KF-R2
● Set construction or painting.
● Altering the default settings and positions of FPAC equipment such as sound
and lighting gear.
● Affixing anything to the walls or the stage (i.e. screwed or nailed sets, posters,
etc.)
● Removing anything already affixed to the walls or the stage.
● The use of theatrical stage-weapons. A written safety plan for the use of
theatrical stage weapons will be required of the User in advance and approved
by FPAC Management. Management/designee must be in attendance when
theatrical stage weapons are in use.
● The use of open flames (including candles) or other incendiary or other
pyrotechnic devices only in rare cases when there is no possible alternative.
Approval for any such use will require a written safety plan to be created in
advance by Management with oversight by the Freeport Fire Chief.
Management/designee must be in attendance when these devices are in use.
H. FPAC Booking
All RSU5 events wishing to receive priority booking must be submitted to the FPAC
Manager for inclusion on the FPAC Booking Calendar once the District Evening
Events Calendar has been finalized by the Superintendent’s Office, with a target date
of July 30th
Administrative Procedure Approved: 10/2/12
Revised: 10/10/17
Revised: 3/3/26
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 4 of 6

NEPN/NSBA CODE: KF-R2
APPENDIX A
SAFETY GUIDELINES ~ FREEPORT PERFORMING ARTS CENTER (FPAC)
The safety of all performers, staff, volunteers, users, and audience members is our highest
priority. All individuals and organizations using the FPAC must adhere to the following
guidelines:
1. General Facility Safety
● All users must follow the direction of FPAC staff at all times.
● School authorities must have access to all places in the FPAC at all times.
● A designated adult supervisor (21+) must be present and responsible for all groups.
● Emergency exits must remain clear and accessible at all times.
● Exterior doors may not be propped open.
● Aisles, corridors, backstage areas, and control booths must remain free of obstructions.
● No running in the lobby, house, backstage, or technical areas.
● No smoking or vaping on RSU5 property.
● Food and drinks (with the exception of water) are not permitted in the FPAC.
2. Stage & Backstage Safety
● Only authorized personnel are permitted backstage and in technical areas.
● Food and drinks are not allowed in technical control areas.
● All set pieces, props, and equipment must be properly secured.
● Users may not operate lighting, sound, rigging, curtains, or other technical systems
unless approved and authorized by the FPAC Manager or RSU5 Administration.
● Ladders, lifts, and elevated work platforms may only be operated by district-approved,
certified personnel.
● Glow tape and backstage lighting may not be altered without approval.
3. Technical Equipment
● All technical equipment must be operated by trained and authorized personnel.
● Users may not plug additional equipment into FPAC systems without approval.
● Extension cords must be properly rated and taped down to prevent tripping hazards.
● Any equipment brought into the facility must be in safe working condition.
● Damage to equipment must be reported to the FPAC Manager immediately.
● Only trained personnel are allowed to access the catwalk.
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 5 of 6

NEPN/NSBA CODE: KF-R2
4. Audience & House Safety
● The house capacity limit of 500 occupants must be strictly observed.
● Sitting in the aisles is not permitted.
● Wheelchair-accessible seating areas must remain unobstructed.
● Strollers, large bags, and equipment may not block aisles.
● Lobby congestion must be monitored during intermission and dismissal.
5. Emergency Procedures
● All users must identify exits and review emergency procedures prior to their event.
● In the event of a fire alarm, all occupants must evacuate immediately. Re-entery is not
permitted until authorized.
● 911 should be called in any life-threatening situation.
● Medical emergencies must be reported to FPAC staff immediately.
6. Custodial & Cleanliness Safety
● Spills must be cleaned immediately to prevent slip hazards.
● All trash must be disposed of properly.
● Users are responsible for leaving all areas clean, including the removal of paper
programs.
● Equipment and furniture must be returned to original locations unless otherwise
approved.
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 6 of 6