SOURCE: https://www.rsu5.org/fs/resource-manager/view/5f44f808-fb7a-4370-b3bc-bc3b9a34f858
SECTION: /board-of-directors-and-policies/adopted-policies-and-procedures
TITLE: KF-R3-Guidelines for the Use of the Joan Benoit-Samuelson Track and Field
TYPE: Finalsite-PDF
============================================================

Code KF-R3
~ RSU5 ~
Guidelines for the Use of the
Joan Benoit-Samuelson Track and Field
Approved by the RSU5 Board of Directors: 3-22-17
Revised by the RSU5 Board of Directors: 3-27-19
Revised by the RSU5 Board of Directors: 6-15-22

Table of Contents
I. Objectives…………………………………………………………………………………. 3
II. Definitions…………………………………………………………………………………. 3
III. Usage Priority……………………………………………………………………………... 3
IV. General Track and Field Use Rules & Restrictions……………………………………….. 4
V. Limitations on Use of Facility - When Field Lights are NOT Required………………….. 5
A. Scheduling and Use
B. Time Constraints
C. Use by Freeport High School
D. Use by Freeport Middle School
E. Use by RSU5 Community Recreation Programs, Other groups
VI. Limitations on Use of Facility - When Field Lights ARE Required…………………….. 6
A. General Rules – Night Scheduling
B. Limitations
VII. Use of Public Address Systems…………………………………………………………... 6
VIII. Parking and Signage……………………………………………………………………… 7
IX. Communication, Reviews and Updates to these Guidelines……………………………... 7
Appended items:
Table 1 Allowable Facility Use Schedule
Table 2 Freeport High School Athletic Teams Facility Use Summary Schedule
Figure 1 Parking and Wayfinding Exhibit
Page 2 of 10

I. Objectives
The Objectives of these Guidelines, listed in no order of priority, are:
A. Maximize RSU5’s use of our athletic facilities and the opportunities for RSU5 students, citizens, and teams
to practice team sports, play competitive games and meets, and host tournaments, championships,
league/conference events, and to enjoy both organized and unorganized (pick-up) fitness and recreational
use of facilities.
B. Preserve and protect RSU5’s investment from excessive use, misuse, or neglect, and to provide scheduling
boundaries that allow proper, efficient, and regular maintenance of the facilities.
C. To control facility schedules and activities in order to reduce undue impacts on neighboring properties,
residential, and commercial properties, through noise, light, traffic, and trespassing.
II. Definitions
The following definitions apply throughout this document:
1. Facility: the Joan Benoit Samuelson Track & Field
2. Scheduled event: a group event scheduled through the Freeport High School athletic or district calendar
or RSU5 Community Programs calendar. This does not apply to “pick-up” play.
3. daytime: approximately 8:00 AM to 5:00 PM, unless lights are required
4. nighttime: approximately 5:00 PM to 9:00 PM and requiring the use of lights. 9:00PM is an
approximate end time. Games may end later than 9:00 PM due to overtime, delays due to injuries,
thunder/lightning, etc.
5. night game: game that requires the use of lights throughout the competition
III. Usage Priority
Gates to the facility will remain unlocked and it will be open to all RSU5 residents and their guests for
unscheduled individual use for recreation, physical fitness, and “pick-up” play. RSU5 reserves the right to restrict
or limit use of the facility when: 1) the facility is being used by students for class time, 2) during routine track or
field maintenance, and 3) RSU5 scheduled events may compromise the safety of the users.
To meet the needs of RSU5, the prioritized scheduled use of sports activities is in the following order:
1. Freeport High School sports teams;
2. Freeport High School physical education programming;
3. RSU5 Middle Schools sports teams;
4. All other RSU5 schools’ physical education classes;
5. RSU5 Community Programs sponsored activities, teams, and sport camps;
6. RSU5 based and operated youth sports programs designed to primarily provide development and
competitive athletic programming for RSU5 youth (i.e. Freeport United, Freeport Gridiron Club);
Page 3 of 10

7. RSU5 based and operated adult sports programs designed to primarily provide recreational athletic
programming for RSU5 adults;
8. Hosting of Maine Principal Association sponsored tournaments, championship games, meets, and
showcases where Freeport High School teams may be eligible to play if their regular season win-loss or
play-off results provide Freeport High School teams an equal (or better) opportunity to compete in such
tournaments, championships, or meets. Generally, such hosting commitments will be made at the
beginning of the “regular” season before Freeport High School’s eligibility to compete in any “post-
season” play can be established.
9. Daytime (only) games and exhibitions by and between teams not necessarily from or associated with
the RSU5, RSU5 Community Programs, or RSU5 based adult or youth sports programs only with the
express permission of the Freeport High School Athletic Administrator and/or Director of RSU5
Community Programs. An example of such an event would be a Western Maine Conference member
in need of our facility due to their own extenuating field circumstances. Such events must adhere to the
use and limitations outlined in these Guidelines.
Additionally, per the Agreement between the Town of Freeport and the RSU, the Facility is available to the
Town of Freeport for a minimum of two (2) events annually.
IV. General Track and Field Use Rules and Limitations
A. The Facility will not be used for concerts or other non-athletic events or non-academic events unless
approved by the Superintendent of Schools and directly supervised by a designated RSU5 School
Department employee.
B. Below are general rules and restrictions regarding use and play on the track and field.
1. Refer to Sections V and VI for scheduling times
2. Refer to Section VI for Use of Field Lights
3. Refer to Section VII for Use of PA System
4. Trash, gum, sunflower seeds, sports drinks and soda are not permitted on the field or track. All food
and drink, excluding water, is limited to the concession area and bleachers.
5. Absolutely no unauthorized vehicles on the field or track.
6. Gear must be carried not dragged.
7. Scoreboard consoles, scorer’s table, public address system and lighting are under the strict control
of the Athletic Administrator and/or Director of Community Programs and use shall be strictly
limited.
8. Personal “boom boxes”, loudspeakers, PA systems are prohibited
9. Artificial noisemakers, such as but not limited to, air horns, bull horns, cow bells, and sirens are not
allowed at the facility.
10. No metal or screw-in cleats are allowed. Track spikes limited to ¼ inch maximum.
11. Keep storage shed and concession/toilet facilities locked when not in use; and supervised when
open.
12. DOGS ARE NOT ALLOWED anywhere inside the fenced area or on the track or turf field.
13. Roadway gate must be kept locked at all times. Carry, do not drive, equipment to the field.
14. Access is open for maintenance and emergency vehicles only.
15. No unauthorized painting or marking on the field - use of cones for corner markers only.
Page 4 of 10

16. Smoking, vaping, drugs, and alcoholic beverages are prohibited on all RSU5 property - this facility
is no exception.
17. Phone service is not available at the field - coaches are advised to carry a cell phone.
18. Athletes intending to use the field should cross the track only at designated location (on mat).
19. Teams and spectators are responsible to patrol areas, including the bench areas, to remove all trash,
debris. Trash receptacles will be available for use.
20. Bikes, skateboards, hover boards, and in-line skates are prohibited.
V. Limitations on Use of Facilities - When Use of Field Lights is NOT Required.
Allowable Uses of the Facility are summarized on Table 1 appended to this document. Consideration to
amend this schedule from year to year may be discussed during annual reviews, as outlined in Section IX
of this document.
A. Scheduling and Use:
1. Limitations on scheduled uses and activities which do not utilize the field lighting system shall be
determined by cooperative efforts between Freeport High School’s Athletic Administrator and the
Director of RSU5 Community Programs, consistent with the priority list above and the requirements of
these guidelines. Citizens wanting more information about the use of the facilities should contact RSU5
Community Programs or reference Board Policy, Community Use of School Facilities, Policy KF.
2. Due to heavy traffic in the Freeport Village district, scheduling of group events/competitions
(excluding regular season high school competition games) with anticipated crowds larger than those in
attendance at regular high school functions, or when the Traffic Control Plan needs to be implemented,
should be avoided during days of peak tourist traffic and when other large events are taking place in
town.
3. The Freeport Performing Arts Center and the RSU5 Athletic Administrator will work collaboratively to
minimize/avoid scheduling events such that both the FPAC and the track and field have concurrent
events, particularly on busy tourist weekends when possible.
B. Time Constraints:
1. No scheduled uses, events or activities will be permitted to begin before 8:00AM, nor be permitted
to continue after 9:00PM. 9:00PM is an approximate end time. Games may end later than 9:00PM
due to overtime, delays due to injuries, thunder/lightning, etc.
2. Notwithstanding these provisions, RSU5 entities may use the facilities prior to 8:00 AM weekdays
for non-competitive activities.
3. RSU5 retains the right to respond responsibly, and with flexibility, to requests for non-competitive
activities with start and end times that are outside of these time restraints.
C. Use by Freeport High School:
1. Table 2 appended to this document provides a schedule of Freeport High School fall and spring
sports teams that will be using the field and track for practices and competitions.
2. Freeport High School physical education and/or wellness classes may use the facility during school
hours, 7:45AM to 2:20PM.
3. Games may start no later than 7:00PM
D. Use by RSU5 Middle School:
The turf field or track may be used by RSU5 Middle School teams during daylight hours, provided the
scheduling falls within the limitations outlined in this Section and is approved by the RSU5 Athletic
Page 5 of 10

Administrator. It is anticipated that the Middle School teams may play up to four (4) games per season on
the field, with the use of field lights.
E. Use by RSU5 Community Programs and others:
The facility is available for use by RSU5 Community Programs, as well as other youth or adult recreational
programs provided, they are scheduled within the limits outlined in this document.
VI. Limitation on Use of Facilities - When Use of Field Lights Is Required.
Nighttime or evening activities and use of the lights place additional concerns regarding impacts on neighboring
properties and homes. Therefore, the following limitations are established for activities, events, games, and meets
that are scheduled for those hours when use of the lights may be required. Any scheduled event that may
reasonably be expected to continue beyond sunset or 8:00PM, whichever is the earlier, shall be included in this
category. Allowable night events (with lights) are summarized in Table 3 appended to this document.
A. General Rules - Night Scheduling.
1. Nighttime use of the facilities shall be permitted only when:
a. A Freeport High School team is directly participating in an interscholastic competition during
the athletic season for that sport during the MPA established season, pre-season, and post-season
play period; or when
b. Official practices of RSU5 High School Teams are required; or when
c. An RSU5 8th grade girls and boys Middle School team is directly participating in one (1)
interscholastic competition each during the athletic season for that sport during the MPA
established season, or post-season play period.
d. Approved RSU5 Community Programs events or reservations
2. Games may start no later than 7:00 PM. Any night games or activities authorized under this policy shall
be scheduled such that they may reasonably be expected to be completed by 9:00 PM, unless otherwise
approved by the Athletic Administrator. 9:00 PM is an approximate end time. Games may end later
than 9:00PM due to overtime, delays due to injuries, thunder/lightening, etc. All athletes and spectators
should be asked to leave the facilities immediately following the games, meets, and every attempt will
be made to turn off the field lights within 20 minutes of the completion of the game, meet or event.
3. Any school team practices during the fall season which require the use of lights shall be completed by
8:45 PM. Any school team practices during the spring season which require the use of lights shall be
completed by 7:15 PM. Every attempt will be made to turn off the field lights within 20 minutes of the
completion of practice, unless otherwise approved by the Athletic Administrator. Night practices shall
be permitted Monday through Friday only.
4. No Saturday night games will be scheduled unless a makeup game is required, with the exception of
approved Community Programs events or reservations which must be completed by 9:00 PM.
5. No night games will be scheduled for Sunday nights, with the exception of approved Community
Programs events or reservations which must be completed by 9:00 PM.
VII. Use of Public Address (PA) System
A. The PA system shall only be utilized using traditional, commonly understood, and accepted methods of use
for official Freeport High School varsity games and events only. The PA System shall not be used for
practice sessions. All other PA use will be limited for emergency, safety, or public service announcements.
Page 6 of 10

B. Scheduled events which require the use of a PA system (and which fall outside these guidelines) will
require approval for use from the Athletic Administrator and/or the Director of the RSU5 Community
Programs.
C. Pre-game music is only allowed during playoff games, tournament, and championship events. All music
will be screened and approved by the Athletic Administrator and/or Director of Community Programs.
Nighttime pre-game music will be limited to 30 minutes of continuous play.
VIII. Parking and Signage
A. For large events when spectator attendance is expected to be larger than normal, Freeport High School will
implement the “Large Event Parking Management Plan”. Figure 1, “Parking and Way-Finding Exhibit”
and appended to this document provides general parking available to visitors as well as pathways to the
facility.
IX. Communication, Reviews and Updates to These Guidelines
A. RSU5 will establish a Track and Field Advisory Board. The board will be comprised of the RSU5 Athletic
Administrator, RSU5 Director of Community Programs, Freeport High School Neighborhood liaison, and
other necessary parties. The Board will meet at least annually to discuss scheduled downtown, town, and
community events, in consideration of proposed scheduled uses of the track and field. The Board will also
be tasked with implementing necessary revisions to this document.
Any comments or concerns regarding the field use may be communicated directly with the RSU5 Athletic
Administrator (tel. 207-865-4706) and/or the Superintendent of Schools (tel. 207-865-0928).
Page 7 of 10

Table 1
Allowable Facility Use Schedule
Facility Hours Lights PA/Sound
User Group Saturdays/
Weekdays Sunday Weekdays Saturday Sunday Weekdays Saturday Sunday
preseason
FHS Sports Team 2:45 to 8:00AM to
sunset to
Practices 8:45PM Fall 8:45 PM Fall
8:45PM
Rarely/Varies Fall NO NO NO NO NO
2:45 to 8:00AM to
7:15PM
7:15PM 7:15PM
Spring
Spring Spring
Games
3:30 to 8:00AM to NO sunset to NO NO Yes Yes NO
9:00PM 9:00PM 9:00PM unless
makeup
game
Same times
as
Weekdays
FHS Physical
education/wellness 7:45AM to
NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA
classes 2:20PM
RSU5 Middle Track
School teams practice with
NA NA NA NA NA NO NO NO
Practices FHS
One game
Games per 8th grade 1 game per
team/Middle 8th grade Football Football
School NA NA team (lights NA NA only only NO
track/1 or 2
required fall
meets
only)
RSU5 Community 8am to
8am to 9pm 8am to 9pm 8am to 9pm
Programs 8am to 9pm 8am to 9pm 9pm
Summer Summer Summer
sponsored events Summer only Year Round Year
only only only
Round
RSU5 8am to
8am to 9pm 8am to 9pm 8am to 9pm Public Service/Emergency Only
Competitive 8am to 9pm 8am to 9pm 9pm
Summer Summer Summer
Youth Sporting Summer only Year Round Year
only only only See Section VII Letter c.
events Round
RSU5 Adult 8am to
8am to 9pm 8am to 9pm 8am to 9pm
Sporting event 8am to 9pm 8am to 9pm 9pm
Summer Summer Summer
Summer only Year Round Year
only only only
Round
MPA post season Varies/when Varies/when Varies/when Varies/when Varies/when Varies/when
NO NO NO
tournament qualified qualified qualified qualified qualified qualified
Conference,
Regional or State
Varies Varies NO Varies Varies NO Yes Yes NO
post-season
Competition,
Town of Freeport
Varies Varies TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD NO
2 events per year
Non-RSU5 8am to Public Service/Emergency Only
8am to 9pm 8am to 9pm 8am to 9pm
sponsored events 8am to 9pm 8am to 9pm 9pm
Summer Summer Summer
(ie. Renters) Summer only Year Round Year See Section VII Letter c.
only only only
Round
Page 8 of 10

Table 2
Athletic Teams Facility Use
Summary Schedule
Practices Home Games
Freeport High School Maximum Games
Practice Times Game Times
Sports Teams Frequency Frequency Proposed
(approximate) (start to end)
“Under the Lights”(3)
Fall (mid August
thru end of October)
Soccer (includes Boy
4 Slots available:
and Girls varsity, 2-3 3:30 to 9:00
2:45 to 4:15
Junior Varsity and preseason
4:15 to 5:45
First Teams)
5:45 to 7:15
7
7:15 to 8:45(1)
regular season
weekdays
Field Hockey Post season
9am to 4pm
(includes Varsity and 5 to 6 days (unknown)
Saturday
JV) per week
1 preseason, 6pm to 8:30pm
Football (includes NA (practice at 4 regular (Friday night,
Varsity and JV) Pownal Road field) season (JV 1-2 excluding
home games). overtime)(1)
May use one of the Post season 1 to 3:30pm
4 slots above unknown (Saturdays)
Spring (April thru 1st
week in June) 2-3
3 Slots available:
preseason 3:30 to 9:00PM
2:45 to 4:15
Lacrosse (includes Boy
4:15 to 5:45
and Girls Varsity and 5 to 6 days 6
5:45 to 7:15
Junior Varsity) per week regular season 3:30pm start
weekdays
weekdays
post season None
9am to 6pm
unknown 8am start
Saturdays
Track & Field (high Saturday / Sunday
school and middle
school practice
together)
Notes:
1. Lights will be required to complete the practice or game beginning in mid-September
Page 9 of 10

Page 10 of 10