sed science classes they may take in college. Topics covered include: Functions,
Graphs and Limits, Derivatives, and Integrals.
Statistics (CP) Year 1 credit Prerequisite: Algebra 1 and Geometry
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement ● Can be taken for college credit if
student meets acceptance criteria
This course is recommended for students who want to learn about real-world data analysis and/or will need to
take statistics in college, but may not be interested in the AP-level course. Students will develop skills in
collecting, examining, and interpreting data using statistical techniques. Topics of study include sampling
theory, descriptive statistics, probability theory, normal distribution, confidence intervals, hypothesis testing,
inference, regression, and correlation. Dual-enrollment credit is offered through SMCC to students who
qualify. For two years of dual-enrollment mathematics, Quantitative Reasoning is recommended before this
course .
AP Calculus AB Year 1 credit Prerequisite: Pre-Calculus and Teacher
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement Recommendation
This course follows the Advanced Placement Calculus AB curriculum put out by the College Board in
conjunction with the advanced placement examination. It prepares students for all topics on the AP test
including: functions, graphs and limits, derivatives, and integrals.
Students taking this course are required to take the AP exam in the spring and students must pay a fee for the
exam. Fee assistance is available by contacting a school counselor or administration.
39
Table of Contents

AP Calculus BC Year 1 credit Prerequisite: AP Calculus AB and
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement Teacher Recommendation
This course follows the Advanced Placement Calculus BC curriculum put out by the College Board in
conjunction with the advanced placement examination. The outline for Calculus BC includes all Calculus AB
topics, with additional study of limits involving infinity, sequences and series and vectors. All students will be
required to take AP exams.
Students taking this course are required to take the AP exam in the spring and students must pay a fee for the
exam. Fee assistance is available by contacting a school counselor or administration.
AP Statistics Year 1 credit Prerequisite: Algebra II AND
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement Pre-Calculus (can be taken concurrently
with Pre-Calculus)
This course follows the Advanced Placement Statistics curriculum put out by the College Board in conjunction
with the advanced placement examination. It prepares students for all topics on the AP test including:
exploratory analysis, planning a study, probability, and statistical inferences. All students will be required to take
the AP exam.
Students taking this course are required to take the AP exam in the spring and students must pay a fee for the
exam. Fee assistance is available by contacting a school counselor or administration.
Post AP Calculus BC - Online Options Semester Varies Prerequisite: Taken after completing AP
(Linear Algebra, Differential Equations, Calculus BC, teacher recommendation
etc.) only
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement
Advanced math courses are available online after the successful completion of AP Calculus BC such as Linear
Algebra, Differential Equations, Multivariable Calculus and more. Students must be recommended by their
math teacher and school counselor.
Personal Finance Semester .5 credit Prerequisite: Algebra I
● Math Elective
● Students may only use 2 math electives
toward their graduation requirement
This course helps students understand the world of money management in the modern world. It will emphasize
knowledge and skills necessary for successfully negotiating our American financial system: forms of pay;
banking; investing; credit cards and other credit issues; budgets; federal, state, and city taxes; and home and
apartment ownership and rental.
Business Finance Semester .5 credit Prerequisite: Algebra I
● Math Elective
● Students may only use 2 math electives
toward their graduation requirement
This course is designed to provide students with the fundamental knowledge skills necessary for understanding
and managing financial aspects of business. Students will learn how to make informed decisions about managing
money, balancing financial risk, and understanding the financial markets in a business context.
40
Table of Contents

Computer Programming (Multi-Level ) Semester .5 credit Prerequisite: None
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement
● May be taken more than once
This course provides both beginners and experienced coders an opportunity to increase their knowledge and
understanding of computer science topics such as programming, hardware architecture, graphics, game design,
and logic systems at any level of complexity. The course provides a chance to learn a new computer language,
write computer programs and apps, and investigate the inner workings of computers, tablets and mobile phones.
Possible languages include industry standards such as JavaScript, C, XCode, Codea, Java, HTML, and Python.
Programming may be done on any combination of laptop, desktop, or tablet computers or on dedicated
microprocessor boards such as Arduino, Raspberry-Pi, or BeagleBone. No programming experience is
required! This course may be taken more than once for credit and is offered in both semesters.
41
Table of Contents

S
cience and Technology Department
Earth Systems Science (CP) Year 1 credit Prerequisite: None
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement
In this course students will explore topics in astronomy, earth science, and ecology with an emphasis on human
interaction with our Earth’s systems. This course(CP or Honors) is required for all 9th grade students.
Earth Systems Science (Honors) Year 1 credit Prerequisite: Algebra I or higher,
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement teacher/counselor recommendation
In this course students will explore topics in astronomy, earth science, and ecology with an emphasis on human
interaction with our Earth’s systems. Students should be prepared for a demanding course at an accelerated
pace. This course (CP or Honors) is required for all 9th grade students and goes deeper into concepts related to
earth systems.
Biology (CP) Year 1 credit Prerequisite: Earth Systems Science
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement
This required course provides a foundation in biological concepts. Topics of study include cell structure and
physiology, biochemistry, DNA structure, protein synthesis, cell division, genetics and evolution.
Biology (Honors) Year 1.5 Prerequisite: Earth Systems Science (CP
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement credits or honors) and teacher recommendation.
Honors Biology aims to provide students with the conceptual framework, factual knowledge, and analytical
skills necessary to deal critically with the rapidly changing science of biology.
This is a rigorous course that provides a strong foundation in fundamental biological concepts. The course uses a
college level AP Biology text and moves at an accelerated pace with greater depth and coverage of material.
Topics of study include cell structure and physiology, biochemistry, DNA structure, protein synthesis, cell
division, genetics and evolution.
This is the first course of a two year sequence that includes AP Biology. Students are not required to take both
courses and may choose to end their biology studies with Honors Biology. Students who wish to sit for the
College Board AP Biology exam must take AP Biology after completion of Honors Biology.
Chemistry in the Community Year 1 credit Prerequisite: Earth Systems Science,
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement Biology, and by recommendation only.
This course teaches chemistry concepts through the lens of societal issues and is designed to teach basic
chemistry concepts and their application to everyday life. Basic concepts and applications of physical science
are surveyed with an emphasis on the role of chemistry in the real world. Topics include measurement skills,
atomic theory, periodic laws, chemical equations and reactions, nuclear chemistry, and organic chemistry.
42
Table of Contents

Chemistry (CP) Year 1 credit Prerequisite: Biology (or taken
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement concurrently)
This course is designed to build upon the concepts learned in Science and Sustainability or Earth Systems
Science, and Biology (CP or Honors). The course emphasizes the conceptual study of chemistry. Topics include
measurement skills, atomic theory, periodic laws, chemical equations and reactions, nuclear chemistry, and
organic chemistry. Good calculator and laboratory skills are important.
Chemistry (Honors) Year 1 credit Prerequisite: Biology (or taken
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement concurrently)
This advanced course is designed to build upon the concepts covered in Science and Sustainability or Earth
Systems Science, and Biology (CP or Honors). Students should be prepared for a demanding laboratory course
at an accelerated pace. Topics include measurement skills, atomic theory, periodic laws, chemical equations,
reactions and stoichiometry, gas laws, acid and base theory, oxidation-reduction, nuclear chemistry and organic
chemistry. Good calculator and math skills are essential.
Physics (CP) Year 1 credit Prerequisite: Biology & Algebra I
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement
This course covers Newtonian mechanics emphasizing the conceptual study of physical phenomena such as
force, motion, momentum and energy and their application to everyday life. There is a strong emphasis on
laboratory-based activities with an emphasis on mathematical relationships.
AP Physics 1 (in person) Year 1.5 Prerequisite: Biology & Calculus (may
● Fulfills a Graduation credits be taken concurrently)
Requirement
AP Physics 1 is an algebra-based, introductory college-level physics course . This course covers Newtonian
mechanics in-depth and provides instruction in each of the following content areas: kinematics, dynamics,
circular motion and gravitation, energy, momentum, simple harmonic motion, torque, and rotational motion, as
dictated by the College Board. The course utilizes guided inquiry and student-centered learning to foster the
development of critical thinking skills. There is significant emphasis on experimental design, predicting
outcomes of experiments, application of mathematical routines, data analysis and interpretation, and
communication of results. This course meets every day.
AP Physics 1 includes topics typically taught in a first-semester introductory college course in algebra-based
physics. Students taking this course should expect a rigorous, fast-paced course of study that will prepare them
for the College Board’s “AP Physics 1” exam in the spring.
Students taking this course are required to take the AP exam in the spring and students must pay a fee for the
exam. Fee assistance is available by contacting a school counselor or administration.
This class will be offered as an in-person class every other year beginning with the 26-27 school year. When the
course is offered in person there will be a required lab section and the course will carry 1.5 credits.
43
Table of Contents

AP Environmental Science Year 1.5 Prerequisite: Earth Systems Science,
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement credits Biology. Chemistry is also recommended.
AP Environmental Science is the equivalent of an introductory college course in environmental science. The
goal of the course is to provide students with the conceptual foundation necessary to understand complex
relationships in the natural world, to develop the skills required to identify and analyze environmental problems,
and to examine alternate solutions for resolving and/or preventing them. This course meets every day.
Environmental science is an interdisciplinary study that draws from the biological, physical, chemical and earth
sciences, as well as social sciences such as economics, politics and sociology. Critical thinking and problem
solving applications are emphasized.
Students taking this course are required to take the AP exam in the spring and students must pay a fee for the
exam. Fee assistance is available by contacting a school counselor or administration.
AP Biology (ONLINE) Year 1.0 Prerequisite: Honors Biology, CP
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement credits Biology with Teacher Permission.
AP Biology is the second course in a two year sequence that includes Honors Biology.
This course will be taken online for the 25-26 school year
This class will be offered as an in-person class every other year beginning with the 26-27 school year. When the
course is offered in person there will be a required lab section and the course will carry 1.5 credits.
AP Biology includes those topics regularly covered in a college biology course for majors. The college course
in biology differs significantly from the usual first high school course in biology with respect to the kind of
textbook used, the range and depth of topics covered, the type of laboratory work done by students, and the time
and effort required of students. The course is organized around the four “big ideas” of biology that include
evolution, cellular processes, genetics and information transfer, and the interactions of biological systems.
Students taking this course are required to take the AP exam in the spring and students must pay a fee for the
exam. Fee assistance is available by contacting a school counselor or administration.
Anatomy & Physiology Year 1 credit Prerequisite: Earth Systems Science &
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement Biology
The course is designed to build on the concepts learned in Earth Systems Science and Biology or Honors
Biology classes. This full year course covers all the main systems of the human body with units on stem cell
research and an investigation of smallpox eradication at the end of the year. This is a laboratory course with a
required extensive fetal pig dissection and lab practicum.
44
Table of Contents

Forensic Science Semester .5 credit Prerequisite: Earth Systems Science &
● Divided into Semester 1 and 2 course (can be Biology
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement taken
Full
Year)
This two semester elective course has been divided into two separate parts with the requirement that semester 1
is taken prior to taking semester 2. Students will be introduced to the basic principles and processes of crime
scene analysis and forensic science. Building on many of the concepts learned in the first two years of the FHS
science sequence, this course will apply skills and techniques to investigate difference examples of evidence.
Topics include crime scene analysis, evidence collection, fingerprints, hair and fiber analysis, blood and blood
spatter evidence and forensic anthropology. Course work will include laboratory exploration, case studies of real
crimes and individual projects.
Gulf of Maine Field Studies Year 1 credit Prerequisite: H. Biology, H. Chemistry
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement OR Teacher Recommendation
In this course, students will tackle environmental problems right here in Freeport, and use the changing
Gulf of Maine (GoM) as our laboratory. The impacts of climate change on the Gulf, as well as mitigation
and adaptation strategies will be explored. We'll then focus on solving a specific problem or issue
important to local citizens.
Issues explored include: Sea level rise, coastal erosion, invasive green crabs, plastic pollution, and
impacts of the warming Gulf of Maine on Maine's fisheries, ecology, and economy
Dual-enrollment credit is offered through University of New England
Endeavor Science Year 1 credit Prerequisite: Teacher Recommendation
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement & Counselor Approval only
The NDVR program serves 10th, 11th, & 12th graders who struggle with or object to traditional schooling, or
who might be at risk of dropping out. It is a nurturing yet demanding environment that values a
real-world-based education. Students earn their core credits in English, science, and social studies through
project-based learning and experiences delivered in a holistic manner. Additionally, the program offers credit
recovery options. Individuals are required to apply for the program and are selected based on their interest in
and need for the program.
Maine Field Studies Semester .5 credit Prerequisite: None
● Elective Credit
Maine Field Studies is a hands-on, experiential course that immerses students in learning about the diverse
ecosystems in Maine. Through outdoor exploration and classroom learning students will investigate the natural
world around them, focusing on the ecology, biodiversity, and environmental processes that make Maine’s
environment unique. This course is designed to foster a deep appreciation for and connection to nature. Some
topics covered may include: forests, surviving winter, population studies, and bird surveys.
45
Table of Contents

Pre-Engineering Courses
Introduction to Engineering & Design Year 1 credit Prerequisite: None
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement
The goal of this course is to familiarize students with a variety of hands-on projects, assignments and
experiences that show the interconnectedness of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM).
Students will complete quarterly projects that incorporate both creativity, scientific principles and formal design
processes in order to meet specific criteria. Additionally, students will explore the various fields within the
engineering profession as well as postsecondary and career planning. Projects will be drawn from the fields of
biochemical, civil, environmental, electrical and aerospace engineering.
Engineering & Design Semester .5 credit Prerequisite: Introduction to Engineering
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement & Design
● May be taken more than once
This project-based class focuses on developing woodworking and sewing skills through creative, hands-on
projects. Students will work independently or in small groups to design and build custom cornhole boards, using
techniques like CNC routing. They will also learn sewing techniques to craft durable and decorative cornhole
bags, adding a functional and personal touch to their projects. Additionally, students will also gain a
fundamental understanding of electronics through designing circuits, culminating in a project to learn the basics
of household wiring.
Advanced Engineering & Design Year 1 credit Prerequisite: 1.5 STEM Credits, Project
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement Proposal & Teacher recommendation
This is a project-based class where students work independently or in teams and are responsible for large-scale
design projects. Students work through the engineering design process to research, develop, construct and
evaluate their projects. Students may elect to participate in one or more state or national competitions such as
VEX Robotics and the Maine Windstorm Challenge Past student projects have included a wind tunnel,
high-temperature kiln, wind turbine blades, robots, and a quadcopter, guitars, app design, rockets, and more!.
Final projects may be tied to a Senior Project or community service project.
NOTE : Students must prepare and present at least one project proposal prior to being admitted to this class.
Proposal forms are available from FHS STEM teachers.
46
Table of Contents

S
ocial Studies Department
Global Studies Year 1 credit Prerequisite: None
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement
This course provides students with global awareness that is the foundation for their future work in Social
Studies. Students expand their geography skills, gaining a deeper understanding of physical and political
geography while exploring the cultures and history of several major world areas. The course begins with an
introduction to the concept of culture and an analysis of several specific culture groups. Students then review
and reinforce their basic geography skills. The bulk of the course will be spent on in-depth studies of the Middle
East, Africa, India, and China. Students use a variety of study and presentation methods. An understanding of
current events will be a major focus. Ultimately, Global Studies is a course in which a student can gain a
foundation in world issues and become active observers of, and potential participants in the events of our
evolving global environment.
Modern World Conflict Semester .5 credit Prerequisite: Global Studies
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement
This course will examine significant global conflicts of the 20th Century, including the First World War, World
War II and the Holocaust, the Cold War, and other conflicts related to political, geopolitical, or religious
ideologies. This course will provide students with a wider lens through which they can examine contemporary
politics and world events. This course will emphasize the use of primary sources in historical analysis.
American Government & Economics Semester .5 credit Prerequisite: Global Studies
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement
This course will examine the roots, framework and purposes of American government. Students will analyze the
United States Constitution and the role of a citizen within a democracy, as well as the essential elements of each
branch of government. Students will be expected to keep up with current events throughout the semester.
Additionally, the curriculum will ask students to identify and explore a variety of topics connected to personal.
finance. This course will help to prepare students in processing and understanding the dynamic nature of the
American political and economic spectrum.
American History Year 1 credit Prerequisite: Modern World Conflict &
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement American Government & Economics
This course is a survey of American History from the Pre-Columbian era to the present. Students will learn
some of the key people, places, concepts and issues that have contributed to the development of America’s story.
Particular emphasis will be placed on developing content knowledge and understanding, document analysis and
historical reasoning skills, application of research skills, and using evidence to support claims. Students will
have the opportunity to demonstrate their knowledge and understanding in a variety of ways.
47
Table of Contents

Economics/Finance Spring .5 credit Prerequisite: Open to 11th-12th grade
● Elective Semester
In this course, students learn about the challenges of having limited resources and unlimited wants and needs.
Students develop an understanding of macroeconomic and microeconomic concepts such as supply and demand,
opportunity cost, risk management, competition, market structures, production and consumption, fiscal and
monetary policy, inflation, unemployment, and international trade. Upon successful completion of the course,
students will understand the ways in which economic decisions affect individuals, groups, market systems, and
countries. Students will also learn about money management, financial planning, credit, and other personal
finance topics.
20th Century U.S. History Through Film Spring .5 credit Prerequisite: Open to 11th-12th grade
● Elective Credit - This cannot be used Semester
as a U.S. History requirement
This course is intended to give students an in-depth understanding of 20th Century American History from the
Progressive Era through the end of the century. While the framework of the course will be chronological and
will require students to master a timeline of the century, the methodology used for understanding will be a series
of historical films and documentaries. Students will do the background research necessary to prepare for these
films, and then will analyze them based upon how each presented the major issues of the time period/event.
Mock Trial and Social Science Fall .5 credit Prerequisite: Open to 9th-12th grades
● Elective Credit Semester
The first quarter will be devoted to participation in the interscholastic Mock Trial competition. Participating
high schools from around the state create prosecution and defense teams which try a fictional case before active
Maine judges and lawyers in Portland, Maine. This is a very intensive simulation activity that requires out of
class commitments, including practice sessions outside of regular school hours, scrimmages with local teams,
and two or more graded trials. It is recommended that if you want to enroll in this course that you take into
consideration your Fall schedule. This course may be taken more than once as Mock Trial topics and course
units change.
Psychology Semester .5 credit Prerequisite: Open to 11th-12th grades
● Elective Credit
Psychology is the study of the relationship between the mind and behavior. As a result, acquiring an
understanding of human psychology is useful in a variety of career fields. This course focuses on:
- The Brain & Behavior - Human Development
- Conditioning, Learning, and Memory - Social Behavior and Interaction
- Psychological Disorders - And more
The course runs as a balance between traditional academic study & lecture, hands-on learning, case study
analysis, practical application, and project-based learning. It will be important to keep an open mind, and be
willing to look into your own perceptions of yourself in order to fully grasp the material.
48
Table of Contents

History of the Dark Ages Semester .5 credit Prerequisite: Open 10th-12th grades
● Elective Credit
This course explores the world from the late Roman Empire to the Renaissance, focusing on the development of
religious society and tension, power struggles, and cross-cultural influences. You'll examine a variety of primary
texts to understand how this period evolved and how it contributes to our understanding of modern society.
You'll have the chance to learn about important and interesting conflicts that shaped the world's history during a
time that was actually quite illuminating and widen your understanding of world history. It turns out parts of the
world weren't very "dark" at all! Students will be expected to bring an interest in learning about history that is
often neglected and the different methodologies used to study very old and varied elements of history.
AP Human Geography Semester .5 credit Prerequisite: Open to 10th-12th
● Elective Credit graders, 9th with teacher
recommendation
AP Human Geography is a course based on investigating population trends, exploring diverse cultural
landscapes, and identifying spatial patterns across various scales. You'll engage in the following:
● Connecting geographic concepts and processes to real-life scenarios
● Understanding information shown in maps, tables, charts, graphs, infographics, images, and landscapes
● Seeing patterns and trends in data and in visual sources such as maps and drawing conclusions from
them
● Understanding spatial relationships using geographic scales
Preparation for the AP exam is a major goal of this course. A.P. Human Geography is recommended for students
who have completed Global Studies with a high degree of mastery and interest in continued study of geography,
but is open to 9th grade students with teacher recommendation and with the understanding that the difficulty of
the course increases for those without a working knowledge of geography beforehand.
Students taking this course are required to take the AP exam in the spring (regardless of which semester this
course is offered) and students must pay a fee for the exam. Fee assistance is available by contacting a school
counselor or administration.
Endeavor Social Studies Year Variable Prerequisite: Teacher Recommendation
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement & Counselor Approval only
The NDVR program serves 10th, 11th, & 12th graders who struggle with or object to traditional schooling, or
who might be at risk of dropping out. It is a nurturing yet demanding environment that values a
real-world-based education. Students earn their core credits in English, science, and social studies through
project-based learning and experiences delivered in a holistic manner. Additionally, the program offers credit
recovery options. Individuals are required to apply for the program and are selected based on their interest in
and need for the program.
49
Table of Contents

AP World History: Modern Year 1 credit Prerequisite: Open to 11th & 12th grade
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement
This is a college level history course designed to meet the needs of students who have a strong interest in
history. The student is expected to read and analyze both primary and secondary source materials and to
demonstrate ability to interpret and evaluate these sources in essay form. Students will take the Advanced
Placement World History: Modern exam in May, as preparation for this exam is a major goal of this course.
Therefore, the course is content-driven with heavy emphasis on written critical analysis. Extensive reading,
writing, and class discussions are integral components of the program. The AP program in World History is
designed to develop a greater understanding of human societies. The course covers world history from circa
1200 CE to the present.
Students taking this course are required to take the AP exam in the spring and students must pay a fee for the
exam. Fee assistance is available by contacting a school counselor or administration.
AP U.S. History Year 1 credit Prerequisite: Open to 11th & 12th grade
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement
This is a college level history course designed to meet the needs of students who have a strong interest in
American history. The course covers American history from the pre-Columbian era to the present. Extensive
reading, writing, and class discussions are integral components of the program and students are expected to read
and analyze both primary and secondary source materials and to demonstrate ability to interpret and evaluate
these sources.
P reparation for the AP exam is a major goal of this course. Therefore, the course is content-driven with heavy
emphasis on written critical analysis. AP U.S. History is recommended for seniors who have completed the
American History course, but is open to juniors upon teacher recommendation and with the understanding that
the difficulty of the course increases for those without a working knowledge of American history. Completion of
summer work prior to the beginning of the course is a critical component to success in this course.
Students taking this course are required to take the AP exam in the spring and students must pay a fee for the
exam. Fee assistance is available by contacting a school counselor or administration.
50
Table of Contents

V
isual and Performing Arts Department
M
usical Arts Course Offerings
Concert Band Year 1 Prerequisite: None
● Fulfills Graduation Requirement credit
Concert Band is open to any student at Freeport High School, regardless of prior experience in music. This
course requires a combination of scheduled class time and after-school rehearsals and/or performances.
Attendance at all concerts and scheduled performances is mandatory. Students are highly encouraged to take this
course for more than one year.
Public performances include (but may not be limited to): the fall homecoming football game, a winter concert, a
spring concert, a concert band festival performance, and the Memorial Day Parade.
Introduction to Drums Semester .5 Prerequisite: None
● Fulfills half of the VPA Graduation credit
Requirement
This course is designed for students with no previous drumming experience. Students will receive guidance and
direction in solving problems related to playing the drums at a beginning level and will learn many of the
different styles, skills and techniques required to become a successful drummer. Areas of concentration include:
correct posture, note reading, rhythmic patterns, improvisation and performing experiences. A brief history of
the drums along with a study of its respective musical styles will also be covered in this course. This course will
explore the fundamentals of percussion performance. Exploration into the performance techniques and literature
for all instruments of the percussion family will be the focus of the course, including snare drum, timpani, mallet
percussion, drum set, and African and Latin percussion instruments. Drums will be provided for the students
enrolled in this course. There is no requirement to purchase your own drums or drumsticks.
Chorus Year 1 Prerequisite: None
● Fulfills Graduation Requirement credit
Chorus is open to anyone who likes to sing, grades 9-12. Members will participate in two major performances
during the year which include our winter and spring concerts. This class meets every other day for 75 minutes,
and rehearsals include sight singing, music theory, and the study of proper vocal technique as well as
contemporary literature. Attendance at all concerts and scheduled performances is compulsory. This course may
be taken for more than one year.
51
Table of Contents

Introduction to Guitar Semester .5 Prerequisite: None
● Fulfills half of the VPA Graduation credit
Requirement
This course is designed for students with no previous guitar experience. Students will receive guidance and
direction in solving problems related to playing the guitar at a beginning level and will learn many of the
different styles, skills and techniques required to become a successful guitarist. Areas of concentration include:
correct posture, note reading, aural skills, rhythmic patterns, chord study, finger-picking styles, musical forms,
improvisation and performing experiences. A brief history of the guitar along with a study of its respective
musical styles will also be covered in this course. Guitars will be provided by the school .
Intermediate Guitar Semester .5 Prerequisite: Introduction to Guitar
● Fulfills half of the VPA Graduation credit
Requirement
This course is designed for students who have successfully passed Introduction to Guitar. Students will receive
guidance and direction in solving problems related to playing the guitar at an intermediate level and will learn
many of the different styles, skills and techniques required to become a successful guitarist. Areas of
concentration include: more advanced note reading, aural skills, rhythmic patterns, intermediate and advanced
chord study, finger-picking styles, musical forms, improvisation and performing experiences. Guitars will once
again be provided by the school (the student is not required to purchase a guitar).
Music Technology (Level 1 & 2) Semester .5 Prerequisite: None
● Fulfills half of the VPA Graduation credit ● Must complete Level 1 to enroll
Requirement in Level 2.
Music Technology is open to any student at Freeport High School, regardless of prior experience in music. In
this class, students will discover their own creative process and how to overcome musical challenges that come
with creating music. Students work on an individual basis, which will allow for frequent personal feedback by
the course instructor. Students will learn how to write music using traditional music notation in ‘Flat.io,’ and
will also learn how to record music and MIDI tracks using ‘GarageBand. Students will learn to do things such
as work with pre-recorded audio samples, write music for drum set, bass, and other various instruments, create a
cover song and create an original song.
Music Technology 2 will teach you how to create a podcast, create a soundtrack to a film/movie, create and/or
use samples within GarageBand and more. Students MUST pass Music Technology 1 to be eligible to enroll in
Music Technology 2.
Introduction to Piano Semester .5 Prerequisite: None
● Fulfills half of the VPA Graduation (half credit
Requirement period)
Introduction to Piano is open to any 9th-12th grade student with no prior piano experience. This course is
designed specifically for beginners where they will be taught basic music theory skills, hand position and
fingerings, and proper practicing techniques. We will use the “Alfred’s Basic Adult All-in-One Course” methods
book along with other resources in order to teach and refine these skills. This course is designed to meet the
needs of a high school student who wants to experience music through self-directed learning and have fun with
the instruments.
52
Table of Contents

Intermediate Piano Semester .5 Prerequisite: Introduction to Piano
● Fulfills half of the VPA Graduation credit
Requirement
Intermediate Piano provides continuing instruction for students who have completed Introduction to Piano. This
class allows for placement of other students who have had some previous piano experience. Content includes
basic keyboard theory (scales, chords, etc.), solo repertoire, and performance skills. Assessment of content
knowledge and mastery of piano skills will take the form of benchmark pieces, music theory and scale
assessments, and other special projects as assigned.
Chamber Choir Year 1 Prerequisite: Audition
● Fulfills Graduation Requirement credit
Chamber Choir is open to students grades 9-12. Singers will audition for this ensemble. This class focuses on
advanced vocal techniques, sight-reading, and ensemble performance. Students will engage in a diverse
repertoire, including classical, contemporary, and world music, with an emphasis on developing harmony,
blending voices, and refining interpretation. The course includes regular mandatory rehearsals and
performances. The course is designed to challenge students musically and enhance their vocal and aural skills
within a dynamic, team-oriented environment. Many students audition for the All State and District III honors
festival.
Cover Band Semester .5 Prerequisite: Students must have taken
● Fulfills half of the VPA credit (and passed) Drums, Guitar, Music tech,
Graduation Requirement Piano, Chorus, Concert Band, or AP
Music Theory.
Unleash your inner rockstar in this dynamic and engaging class where students form their own high school
cover bands! This course is designed for students with a passion for music who want to hone their performance
skills, collaborate with peers, and bring contemporary songs to life in concert.
Students will learn:
● How to arrange and perform covers of popular songs from various genres.
● Instrumental and vocal techniques for live performances.
● The fundamentals of stage presence and audience engagement.
● Sound equipment setup and basic audio mixing.
● Teamwork and communication within a band setting.
Class activities include regular rehearsals, individual practice sessions, individual recording sessions, and peer
feedback.. Throughout the course, students will have opportunities to perform for school music concerts, talent
shows, or community functions. Attendance at all concerts and scheduled performances is compulsory.
Whether you're a vocalist, guitarist, drummer, keyboardist, or any other musician, this class is your stage to
shine, develop your talent, and share your love of music with others. Prior experience with an instrument or
singing is required.
53
Table of Contents

Voice Class Semester .5 Prerequisite: None
● Fulfills half of the VPA Credit
Graduation Requirement
Voice Class provides students with a comprehensive introduction to vocal technique and performance. Students
will explore vocal anatomy to understand how the voice works, practice music literacy through sight-reading
and ear training, and receive personalized, one-on-one vocal coaching to develop their range and vocal health.
Students will learn how to care for their voices and avoid strain. Students will explore singing multiple genres
including Broadway, Opera, Jazz, R&B, Bluegrass, Soul, Blues and Country. Throughout the course, students
have the opportunity to apply these concepts to solo performances, refining their skills in a supportive learning
environment.
AP Music Theory Year 1 Prerequisites: Teacher recommendation
● Fulfills Graduation Requirement credit required and/or prior music performance
ensemble performance
AP Music Theory is an advanced level course designed to engage students in learning activities that will help
them to achieve the outcomes assessed by the College Board's Advanced Placement Music Theory Examination.
It is equivalent to a first-year college-level theory class.
The AP Music Theory course is designed to develop a student's ability to recognize, understand, and describe
the basic materials and processes of music that are heard or presented in a score, as well as further student's
study of musicianship. These abilities will be developed through various aural, performance, written, creative,
and analytical exercises. The curriculum aims to enrich students' musical experiences both in and out of their
performance ensemble classes. It integrates aspects of melody, harmony, texture, rhythm, form, musical
analysis, elementary composition and, to some extent, history and style. Musicianship skills such as dictation
and other listening skills, sight-singing and keyboard harmony are considered an important part of the theory
course. Although this course focuses on music of the Common Practice Period (1600-1900), materials and
processes found in other styles and genres are also studied.This course is designed to provide students with the
skills necessary to create and analyze music using an AP/college level approved text. The content will focus on
the. It is essential that a student have performance skills on any instrument. This course is strongly
recommended for the student considering music as a college major, minor or career.
Students taking this course are required to take the AP exam in the spring and students must pay a fee for the
exam. Fee assistance is available by contacting a school counselor or administration.
54
Table of Contents

T
heatre Arts Course Offerings
Theatre I Semester .5 credit Prerequisite: None
● Fulfills half of the VPA Graduation
Requirement
Theatre I is designed to give students a deeper understanding, and appreciation for the fine art of theatre through
exploration of its basic elements. Theatre I students engage in ensemble building, vocabulary, acting skills,
playwriting, introduction to technical theatre and creative processes. These activities facilitate artistic growth
through storytelling, character development, improvisation, creative movement and scripted scenes.
Theatre II Semester .5 credit Prerequisite: Theatre I
● Fulfills half of the VPA Graduation
Requirement
Theatre II students will take their knowledge of performance and build upon it. The focus of this course is
acting and directing. Students will be required to direct short scenes and perform in both their classmates’ scenes
and alone. Students will study a wide variety of acting and directing styles to apply to specific projects. All
students are required to perform in a public final performance of 10-minute plays as either an actor or director.
Production Design Semester .5 credit Prerequisite: None, May be repeated for
● Fulfills half of the VPA Graduation credit with teacher permission
Requirement
A project-based class that focuses on understanding the design process, especially as it relates to the theater, and
works on tackling the tasks set before the students in a particular play. This class is run in tandem to the
extra-curricular drama program because the students will use creative-thinking and problem-solving skills in the
classroom to assist the play being staged. Students will develop a basic understanding of set construction,
lighting design, sound design, hair and make-up design, costume design and prop design.
Advanced Theatre Semester .5 credit Prerequisite: Prerequisite Theatre I,
● Elective Credit Theatre II, or Teacher Permission, may
be repeated for credit
Students will participate in all elements of a full theatrical production. From acting to technical design, students
will facilitate all aspects of the Spring Play (TBD year to year based on enrollment). Students will be required
to meet outside of class during the week prior to performance dates for technical rehearsals. This course may be
taken more than once.
Dance Semester .5 credit Prerequisite: None
● Elective Credit
Dance I is a course for students with any degree of dance experience or anyone new to dance. The principles,
elements and protocol of dance will be introduced. Students will learn proper body alignment, flexibility,
various techniques and vocabulary of basic movements. Combinations and across the floor work may include,
but are not limited to, ballet, modern, jazz, african, folk, salsa, tap, and musical theatre.
55
Table of Contents

V
isual Arts Course Offerings
Foundations of Art Year 1 credit Prerequisite: None
● Fulfills Graduation Requirement
● This is the recommended visual art
course for all 9th graders
This is the recommended visual art course for all 9th graders. This course explores the basic elements of
visual design through introductory exercises in drawing, painting, sculpture, and printmaking. Art is presented
as a visual language mastered through the development of the student’s perceptual skills and creative
problem-solving techniques. Artistic production, art history, and aesthetics will be essential components
throughout. Reading, critiquing, presenting, and writing about art and artists are an essential course
component. All lessons are defined by technical and formal parameters, however, choice of subject matter is
almost always left entirely to the students. This course requires students to create a digital portfolio including
images of their projects, written reflections, and process reflections. The National Visual Art Standards are
used for all assessments. Foundations of Art has an honors option.
Ceramics I Semester .5 credit Prerequisite: Foundations of Art
● Elective Credit
In this class, students may make both functional and sculptural clay work using basic hand-building techniques.
Through focusing on the integration of form and surface, as well as the study of both historical and
contemporary clay work, students understand the importance of good design and quality craftsmanship.
Individual and group critiques help students continuously improve their work and make informed artistic
decisions.
Ceramics II Semester .5 credit Prerequisite: Foundations of Art &
● Elective Credit Ceramics I
This class builds on the skills and techniques acquired in Ceramics I. Students are challenged towards greater
personal expression in ceramic media. Students broaden their knowledge of construction and finishing
techniques through consideration of both historic and contemporary ceramic artists and an increased
understanding of the elements of art as they pertain to three-dimensional art.
3D Design Semester .5 credit Prerequisite: Foundations of Art
● Elective Credit
This course focuses on developing fluency, understanding, and personal expression in sculpture. Reading and
writing about art and artists are essential course components. All lessons are defined by technical and formal
parameters, however, choice of subject matter is almost always left entirely to the students. Students get to
choose from a variety of materials including: clay, plaster, alginate, wire, paper, trash, etc.. This course requires
students to create a digital portfolio including images of their projects, written reflections, and process
reflections. Students will create a mini sustained investigation during the last quarter of the class. The National
Visual Art Standards are used for all assessments.
56
Table of Contents

2D Design Semester .5 credit Prerequisite: Foundations of Art
● Elective Credit
This course focuses on the two-dimensional techniques of drawing painting and digital art using the Adobe
Suite. Students are challenged to develop their visual thinking skills and visual expression through a variety of
assignments and media. All lessons are defined by technical and formal parameters, however, choice of subject
matter is almost always left entirely to the students. Students are required to enter specific art competitions
throughout the semester. Towards the end of the semester, students design a sustained investigation (in the
model of AP Art & Design). This course requires students to create a digital portfolio including images of their
projects, written reflections, and process reflections. The National Visual Art Standards are used for all
assessments.
Advanced Art & Design Year 1 credit Prerequisites: Foundations of Art & A
● Elective Credit Design Course
This is a course for the student who has strong visual skills and a passion for creating. Students design a
sustained investigation (in the mode of AP ARt & Design) and create 15 works of art all following under a
general inquiry (of their choosing). This class section is usually combined with the students taking their fourth
year of art (AP Art & Design). All lessons are defined by technical and formal parameters, however, choice of
subject matter is almost always left entirely to the students. Students develop an inquiry question and create a
sustained investigation while developing their own style. Students are required to enter specific art competitions
throughout the year. All students create a digital portfolio including images of their projects, written reflections,
and process reflections. In May, all advanced/AP students exhibit their art portfolio in a large group show . The
National Visual Art Standards are used for all assessments.
All students in Advanced Art & Design have the option of submitting their portfolio to the AP Art & Design
exam. Students must choose if they are going to do so by November. If they do choose to pay and submit to
the College Board for credit, the course name on their transcript will be changed when grades close in June.
Fee assistance is available by contacting a school counselor or administration.
AP Art History Year 1 credit Prerequisites: None
● Elective Credit
AP Art History is designed to provide the same benefits to secondary school students as those provided by an
introductory college course in art history: an understanding and enjoyment of architecture, sculpture, painting
and other art forms within historical and cultural contexts. We learn about the cultures of our world through
analyzing objects. In the course, students examine major forms of artistic expression from the past and present
and from a variety of cultures. This class is lecture and discussion based (not studio art based). There are
multiple field trip opportunities in this class. Annually we usually visit the Museum of Fine Arts - Boston, The
Bowdoin Museum of Art, The Colby College Museum of Art and the Bates Museum of Art.
Students taking this course are required to take the AP exam in the spring and students must pay a fee for the
exam. Fee assistance is available by contacting a school counselor or administration.
57
Table of Contents

AP Art & Design Year 1 credit Prerequisite: Foundations of Art, A
● Elective Credit Design Course (2D or 3D) & Advanced
Art & Design
AP Art and Design portfolios are designed for students who are seriously interested in the practical experience
of art. Students develop an inquiry question and create a sustained investigation of 15 works while exploring
their own artistic style. AP Art and Design is not based on a written exam; instead, students submit digital
portfolios of their art for evaluation by the AP College Board in May. The AP Art and Design Curriculum
consists of three portfolio exam options — 2-D Design, 3-D Design, and Drawing — corresponding to the most
common college foundation courses. Students are required to enter specific art competitions throughout the
semester. This class section is usually combined with the students taking their third year of art (Advanced Studio
Art). The National Visual Art Standards are used for all assessments.
Students taking this course are required to take the AP exam in the spring and students must pay a fee for the
exam. Fee assistance is available by contacting a school counselor or administration.
Photography I Semester .5 credit Prerequisites: Grade 10 or above
● Fulfills half of the VPA Graduation
Requirement
This semester-long course introduces students to photography as an art form. Students learn compositional skills
through the study of the elements of art. Students explore the history of traditional photography as well as
techniques and methods used by contemporary digital photographers. This course includes lessons in photo
editing/manipulation using Photoshop software (first half) as well as traditional black and white film
photography and basic darkroom techniques (second half). Researching and writing about photographers is an
essential course component. This course requires students to create a digital portfolio including images of their
projects, written reflections, and process reflections. The National Visual Art Standards are used for all
assessments. Digital and 35mm film camera recommended (either point and shoot or DSLR/SLR). Some
cameras are also available from the school.
Photography II Semester .5 credit Prerequisites: Photo 1
● Fulfills half of the VPA Graduation
Requirement
This course introduces the creative manipulation of alternative photographic materials and processes such as
toning, hand coloring, and multiple exposures using both darkroom and digital technology (Photoshop).
Emphasis is placed on personal vision and modes of seeing. Upon completion, students should be able to create
properly exposed images using a variety of photographic materials and processes. This course requires students
to create a digital portfolio including images of their projects, written reflections, and process reflections. The
National Visual Art Standards are used for all assessments. Digital and 35mm film camera recommended
(either point or shoot or DSLR/SLR). Some cameras are also available from the school.
58
Table of Contents

M
edia Arts Course Offerings
Video Production I Semester .5 credit Prerequisite: none
● Elective Credit
This course is a hands-on approach to video technology with the use of the digital video camera and using basic
field production techniques. Students train on equipment and learn non-linear editing techniques using iMovie
editing software. Students are required to film two outside events (i.e. sports contest, concert or school musical).
The class will get an introduction to Channel 14 and its operation. Students will do a variety of projects to gain
experience in basic video skills.
Video Production II Semester .5 credit Prerequisite: Video Production I
● Elective Credit
This class expands on the principles taught in Video One. Students continue to develop their camera and editing
techniques and delve deeper into various video projects to produce longer and more complex videos. Students
are required to film two outside events (i.e. sports contest, concert or school musical). Students work with voice
over techniques in video storytelling as well as learn basic principles used in live on-location news stories.
59
Table of Contents

W
orld Languages Department
French I Year 1 credit Prerequisite: None
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement
This course teaches the four language skills: speaking, listening, reading, and writing, with an emphasis on
dialogue. Role-playing and skits are used as tools to increase oral competency. Writing practice includes
short-answer responses and short descriptive pieces. Students will work from a compilation of literary sources ,
as well as a variety of online resources.
French II Year 1 credit Prerequisite: French I
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement
Students build on the foundations of French I and enhance their corpus of vocabulary and grammatical form
while developing the four primary linguistic skills. Written work includes students’ original narratives. Students
work from a compilation of sources , as well as a variety of online resources.
French III Year 1 credit Prerequisite: French II
● Elective Credit
In this course, students continue to develop and hone their four primary linguistic skills through in-depth
grammar study, vocabulary acquisition, and extensive speaking and writing practice. Students will work on
further development of their reading comprehension, writing, speaking and listening skills in French.
French IV Year 1 credit Prerequisite: French III
● Elective Credit
This full-year course offers an approach to fluency through all four of the linguistic skill areas: listening,
speaking, reading, and writing. Students broaden and deepen their current understanding of grammatical
structures while learning new structures that allow them to add complexity and abstract thought to their verbal
and written expression. Each unit introduces an aspect of cultural life along with thematic vocabulary, giving
students the opportunity to practice and play. They read and analyze literature, write and edit short
compositions, participate in debates and roundtable discussions, and engage in various forms of creative
expression. Through online and in-class collaboration, students are exposed to authentic contemporary language
and culture in context.
French V Year 1 credit Prerequisite: French IV
● Elective Credit
In this course, students explore a selection of French and francophone literature through readings, discussions,
and films. Students expand their French skills through analysis, critique, and discussion. Films are used to
reinforce and support each piece of literature, to develop students’ listening comprehension, and to foster and
heighten in-class discussion. Grammar and structure work are also emphasized throughout the year to help
students review, refine, and develop their writing and speaking skills. Oral activities emphasize proficiency in
spontaneous speech and thought.
60
Table of Contents

Latin I Year 1 credit Prerequisite: None
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement
In this course, students acquire basic Latin vocabulary and grammar. Students read and interpret short stories in
Latin while learning about the culture and history of the Romans.
Latin II Year 1 credit Prerequisite: Latin I
● Elective Credit
This course continues the vocabulary and grammar acquisition from Latin I, but at a higher level of complexity.
Students will read text that features a deeper sophistication in plot and storyline, while confronting the bigger
questions of what it meant to be Roman.
Latin III Year 1 credit Prerequisite: Latin II
● Elective Credit
Students continue to develop their study of Latin grammar, vocabulary, and syntax at a more advanced level
while deepening their understanding of Roman history and cultural topics.
Latin IV Year 1 credit Prerequisite: Latin III
● Elective Credit
This course continues and expands upon the work begun in Latin III, stressing the development of fluency and
depth in translation skills and literary analysis. Students are encouraged to hone their skills in translation, paying
close attention to structure and meaning. Students will transition to longer continuous text using novellas and
then authentic texts.
Spanish I Year 1 credit Prerequisite: None
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement
This course provides an introduction to the language, culture, and geography of the Hispanic world. Students
acquire language skills sufficient to describe themselves and their world and to inquire about others through
listening, speaking, reading, and writing activities.
Spanish II Year 1 credit Prerequisite: Spanish I
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement
Spanish II builds on the grammar introduced in Spanish I, but greatly expands knowledge of vocabulary.
Cultural knowledge continues to develop through readings, pictures (videos), and projects. Listening
comprehension is further enhanced. Students are expected to make every effort to communicate in Spanish in
class. Role-playing and skits are used as tools to increase oral competency.
Spanish III Year 1 credit Prerequisite: Spanish II
● Elective Credit
This course focuses on oral and written proficiency in the language. Exercises include vocabulary development.
Topics from Spain and Latin America are used to develop not only a linguistic, but also a cultural fluency. A
review of basic and advanced grammar is included, especially verb mastery. New tenses this year include the
progressives, the perfects, and the subjunctive. Oral presentations are integral to the course to evaluate the
student’s growing ability in the language.
61
Table of Contents

Spanish IV Year 1 credit Prerequisite: Spanish III
● Elective Credit
Spanish IV focuses more intensely on the four skill areas of reading, writing, listening, and speaking, and on
developing proficiency in each area. Student activities center on reading short stories and abridged novels,
writing short essays, and speaking in both formal and informal situations. Class discussions of current
events/news stories take place each quarter. Students continue to explore, in more depth, the many facets of
Spanish culture.
Spanish V Year 1 credit Prerequisite: Spanish IV
● Elective Credit
Spanish V is intended to help students prepare for a college level class. Work is more independent, so student
motivation is key to success. The history, literature, and art of Spain are covered simultaneously in three or four
major units. Texts include, “El Cid”, “Fuenteovejuna”, and “El burlador de Sevilla”. Class discussions on
current events occur every other week throughout the year. Movies in Spanish may be shown, including
“Volver”, and “Casi Casi”. The rest of the verb tenses (future perfect, conditional perfect, present perfect
subjunctive, and the past perfect of subjunctive) are covered, as are the sequence of tenses, idiomatic
expressions, and a more challenging verb list. Sometimes this class is simultaneously taught with Spanish IV.
**Additional language courses are available online through online courses. School counselors can
provide more information about online language offerings.**
62
Table of Contents

A
dditional Academic Opportunities
Early College Credit Opportunities Semester 1 credit Prerequisite: 9th-12th grades;
Application
Through partnerships with Maine colleges, it is possible for high school students to take university courses both
in the classroom and online for credit. Students are eligible to take up to 4 college courses (12 credits) per year.
Click this link to register for an account and to search for classes. Once you have an account you can register for
courses: https://explorec.maine.edu/
More information is available from the Guidance Office. Students may only use this program for courses we do
not offer at FHS. Students are responsible for cost of materials. Scholarships are available.
Edmentum PLATO Semester Variable Prerequisite: Counselor Rec.
PLATO ( P rogrammed Learning Automated Teaching Operations) is a computer-based curriculum that can be
used for academic remediation or for credit recovery. The PLATO program is aligned to the Common Core State
Standards and uses research-based techniques for program delivery and assessments. Students are placed into
the PLATO lab through the student services department based on prerequisite fulfillment and individual
circumstances. PLATO is a non-graded curriculum at FHS, which will not influence a student's GPA, but will
serve as a means for students to gain credit for graduation by demonstrating proficiency of FHS standards and
indicators on a Pass/Fail basis. PLATO courses are not to be used instead of taking the course at FHS.
AP4ME Year 1 credit Prerequisite: Counselor & Parent
Approval
AP4ME offers over 20 online Advanced Placement courses to any student residing in a Maine school
administrative unit who is educated at the public expense. Students who participate in AP4ME are taught by
Maine certified teachers who receive extensive training. AP4ME classes are year-long online courses that run
from the day after Labor Day through one week after the scheduled date of the AP Exam for the course. All
AP4ME courses follow the same calendar, regardless of a student’s own school calendar, and each course
satisfies all College Board Advanced Placement course requirements. Students may only use this program for
courses we do not offer at FHS. Students taking this course are required to take the AP exam in the spring
and students must pay a fee for the exam. Fee assistance is available by contacting a school counselor or
administration.
63
Table of Contents

Endeavor Year Variable Prerequisite: Teacher Recommendation
& Counselor Approval only
This program provides an alternative pathway to support students in getting to high school graduation. Students
participated in science, ELA and social studies courses as well as courses for credit recovery. NDVR creates
and implements individual learning plans for 10th, 11th and 12th grade students in the program. Students are
also provided social-emotional support and engage in project-based learning and community building
experiences. Students must apply to this program and are selected based on previous academic, attendance, and
behavior records.
Work Study Opportunities Semester Variable Prerequisite: None
Or Year
Several options are available for students to have community-based work experiences in conjunction with their
academic classroom work. All student programs are designed according to individual student needs (academic
requirements and career and personal goals). Please speak to your counselor for more details.
Service Learning and Community Semester Variable Prerequisite: None
Service Or Year
Service learning provides an opportunity for students to be actively involved in the learning process and is a way
to develop personal and leadership skills through service to others. As students participate in meeting
community needs, they can explore educational and career choices. Service learning creates the opportunity for
students to build positive community connections and integrates academic objectives with service experience to
facilitate student learning, personal and social growth, and civic responsibility. The Service Learning
Coordinator encourages and supports student participation in community service and acts as a clearinghouse for
information about community service opportunities.
Embark Year None Prerequisite: Application
Embark is a college transition program offered in 74 Maine high schools. It is designed for students who are
undecided about college, yet have the potential to succeed in college. Embark offers a combination of support,
advising, college courses, and scholarships to help students prepare for and be successful in college. Students
are selected by their high school during their junior year. All participating students receive support services
during high school, and many receive an Embark scholarship to continue their education at a community college
after graduating from high school. If you are interested, check with the Guidance Office.
Dual Enrollment Year Variable Prerequisite: Application
Through a partnership with Southern Maine Community College, FHS students can apply to earn college credits
for select FHS courses, such as Quantitative Reasoning, English 12 & Statistics, while simultaneously earning
FHS credit. Courses are taught at FHS by FHS teachers who have been endorsed by SMCC to teach a
college-level course. More information is available from the Guidance Office.
64
Table of Contents

Morse Street Pre-Apprenticeship Semester .5 credit Prerequisite: School Counselor
This program works in conjunction with the Morse Street School and students are paired up with a teacher to
work with students in grades K-2 and provide instructional support. These students will apply to the program
through their guidance counselor and will be supporting in the program by our service learning coordinator.
Teacher’s Aide Semester Variable Prerequisite: Teacher recommendation
Students can receive approval from a course teacher to serve as a teacher’s aide for a semester or a year-long
course. The teacher’s aide role can consist of supporting peers in the classroom with academic work and/or
study skills and may also entail supporting the teacher with logistical tasks. A teacher recommendation is
required to sign up to be a TA.
Independent Study Semester Variable Prerequisite: Teacher, Parent &
Counselor Approval
Independent study is designed to offer an opportunity for self-motivated students to research or study a selected
topic on an independent basis. The topic and its study must be approved, supervised, and coordinated by a
teacher on the staff of Freeport High School. The purpose of this course is to allow students greater flexibility
and freedom in pursuing individual educational goals. Independent study also fosters the student’s self-reliance
as s/he assumes personal responsibility for an area of study. This course allows application of creative effort in
areas not presently available in the curriculum. The teacher must verify the completion of the work. A parent,
the appropriate curriculum teacher, and the Guidance Office must approve the formal proposal.
Abroad Programs Variable Variable Prerequisite: Application for Credit
Offered to any Freeport High School student who wants to master another language and/or enjoy the benefits of
living and studying abroad without sacrificing high school graduation credits or preparation for top U. S.
colleges. Students and their families are responsible for researching and funding the cost of these programs.
Please see the Guidance Office for credit approval prior to going abroad.
Jobs for Maine’s Graduates (JMG) Year 1 credit Prerequisite: JMG Teacher
Recommendation
The school-to-work program is a 9-12 class that will focus on having a concrete plan for the student upon
graduation. In-class activities focus on work-related preparation: job applications, cover letters, resumés, job
interviewing, public speaking, and telephone/personal communication skills. Students will be members of a
career association that helps to plan classroom activities and will require some time spent outside of school
hours. Student, parent, and teacher will sign a contract at the start of the year that sets expectations for all
parties. Instructor will be in contact with seniors on a monthly basis following graduation to provide assistance
and guidance as needed.
65
Table of Contents

Senior Projects 4 weeks None Prerequisite: Application & Approval
Through Senior Projects, students at Freeport High School have the opportunity to create and realize a learning
experience during four weeks of the last quarter of their senior year. The culmination of this learning experience
is a presentation of the project given before students, faculty, administration, parents, and community. While the
presentation is the most visible record of the student’s accomplishment, it is also supported by a solid foundation
of documented planning and progress. Freeport High School believes a successful final product can only be
achieved through careful planning, time management, reflection, analysis, and active professional guidance. All
Seniors participate either in a Senior Project or in May Term beginning the first week in May.
May Term 4 weeks None Prerequisite: Seniors Only
Seniors who do not participate in Senior Projects will participate in May Term. Students are required to be in
school for 4 weeks and follow the specific May Term maroon/white schedule. Students engage in coursework
centered around life skills, real-life application of content knowledge, and community service. A full-time
courseload, May Term spans multiple disciplines (humanities, maths, and sciences) and is focused on real-world
application of what is learned in these disciplines in the field on weekly service trips. Guest speakers in areas
related to the course of study are brought in frequently to encourage understanding of how the skills students are
learning can be applied to the professional world. By the end of the month, students will have been assessed in
multiple areas and multiple disciplines, involving but not limited to engagement, content knowledge, and work
completion, ultimately receiving a holistic pass or fail grade for the course.
66
Table of Contents

R
egion 10 Technical High School
www.r10tech.org
General Information
Technical Education offers hands-on learning designed to prepare students for college and the working
world. A unique combination of classroom instruction, laboratory work, community-based volunteer and
live work programs, and on-the-job-training becomes the springboard for future success. Strong
attendance, self-discipline, and a desire to work in technical education are important for a successful
experience at Region Ten. We offer knowledge and skills for a lifetime.
Rising Ninth graders are only eligible to apply for the Foundations program (although Creative
Digital Media might accept 9 th graders by special permission). 10 th graders are also eligible for
Foundations. All other programs require students to be at least rising 10 t h graders
Articulation Agreements/Dual Enrollment
Region Ten Technical High School has developed dual enrollment and articulation agreements with
Maine post-secondary community colleges. These colleges will award credit for work completed at
Region Ten Technical High School. For example, students in Culinary Arts have training in Sanitation.
This certified course is required for ServSafe Manager certification and qualifies for community college
credit. Similar opportunities are available for students in Metal Fabrication and Welding, Automotive
Technology, Early Childhood Development, Health Occupations/CNA, Auto Collision Repair,
EMT-Basic, Outdoor Powersports, Creative Digital Media, and Building Trades.
Region Ten Credit Options
Region Ten students earn 3 credits for each successful year completing a program. A Freeport student has
the option to earn core academic credits at Region Ten. The core credit varies by program.
67
Table of Contents

R
egion 10 Courses
Auto Collision Repair 2 Years 3 credits Prerequisite: None
Students enrolled in this two-year course will receive instruction on how to safely and productively perform
all phases of non-structural collision repair and refinishing. This program is divided in two courses consisting
of: auto refinishing and non-structural analysis and damage repair. Automotive refinishing is a major
component of this program. Color mixing, matching, tinting and blending techniques are explored
emphasizing hands-on experience. Upon completion of this course, the student should be able to enter the
workforce at an entry level position or move on to a technical college to further advance their skills. Students
are encouraged to participate in SkillsUSA (student organization) to enhance their leadership opportunities
and compete at both state and national levels. Integrated Credit: Math & Science
Concurrent enrollment agreements are currently in place for the second year of the program with a total of
3 NMCC credits available.
Automotive Technology I 1 Year 3 credits Prerequisites: None
Preference given to rising 11th graders; 10th and
12th graders accepted if room. Mechanical
experience helpful. Desire to work on vehicles is
a must. Valid driver's license, learner’s permit, or
enrollment in Drivers’ Ed class highly
encouraged.
The one-year Automotive Technology I program introduces students to the world of automotive maintenance
and repair through a combination of classroom training and shop work on customer vehicles. Students will
gain the knowledge, skills and attitudes necessary to safely work in a shop setting using the tools and
equipment to perform professional repairs on modern vehicles. Utilizing national, state, and local resources
including standards set by NATEF (National Automotive Technicians Education Foundation) and the Maine
Department of Education, students will have the opportunity to earn professional certifications from ASE
(Automotive Service Excellence) and a Maine State Inspection License. Units covered during this first-year
program include comprehensive safety training, Brake Systems, Electrical and Electronic Systems, Engine
Performance, and Steering and Suspension Systems. Students are encouraged to participate in SkillsUSA
(student organization) to enhance their leadership opportunities and compete at both state and national levels.
Integrated Credit: Math & Science
Concurrent enrollment agreements are currently in place for the both years of the program with a total of
15 SMCC credits available.
68
Table of Contents

Automotive Technology II 1 Year 3 credits Prerequisite: Successful completion of
Automotive Technology I.
The one-year Automotive Technology II program is designed for students who have successfully completed
the Automotive Technology I program. Auto Tech II continues to build a student's portfolio of skills and
knowledge in the automotive field through work in the shop that strengthens and augments previously covered
units of instruction. Newly covered units include Automatic Transmission and Transaxle, Manual Drive Train
and Axles, Engine Repair, and Heating and Air Conditioning Systems. All students completing the course
will leave with a professional resume and a letter of introduction to enable the student to seek immediate
employment in the automotive field or to enhance the admission process into a post-secondary school. ASE
certification and State Inspection licensing are encouraged. Professional development through Skills USA
continue to provide growth opportunity as well as potential scholarship sources. Students are encouraged to
participate in SkillsUSA to enhance their leadership opportunities and compete at both state and national
levels.
Integrated Credit: Math & Science
Concurrent enrollment agreements are currently in place for the both years of the program with a total of
15 SMCC credits available. Articulation agreements are also available for CMCC and EMCC.
Building Trades 2 Years 3 credits Prerequisite: None
per year
This two-year course of study provides a combination of masonry and carpentry. Together, they offer a wide
range of classroom and hands-on work experiences in the construction trades with a strong emphasis on
safety. Carpentry areas of concentration include rough and finish carpentry; floor, wall, and roof framing;
exterior trim; insulation; drywall installation; construction planning; and, drafting.. Working offsite on
community project functions is an important component of building trades. Students are encouraged to
participate in SkillsUSA (student organization) to enhance their leadership opportunities and compete at both
state and national levels.
Integrated Credit: Math
One college credit is available through Concurrent Enrollment with Central Maine Community College.
69
Table of Contents

Creative Digital Media 2 Years 3 credits Prerequisites: None
(3rd Year per year
possible per
instructor
approval)
With Graphic Design and Illustration as a foundation for the program, Creative Digital Media is designed to
introduce students to careers associated with digital design including but not limited to graphic design,
illustration, animation, and video game design. Students will be introduced to the basic principles and
elements of design and gain software experience required to solve visual communication problems. Using
industry standard Adobe software and related programs, students develop the ability and confidence to create
appropriate and successful designs for a variety of applications. Additionally, upon completion of the course,
students will have the opportunity to become Adobe Certified Associates upon successful completion of the
Adobe exam. The main area of focus are these: Understanding and utilizing principles and elements of design
effectively; Learning industry standard Adobe software (Photoshop, Illustrator, InDesign, and AfterEffects);
Developing analytical thinking and problem solving skills for the digital design industry, Preparing portfolios
for professional presentation, evaluation, and college entry. Integrated Credit: Visual & Performing Art
Six Southern Maine Community College credits are available through concurrent enrollment for each of
the two years of the program, for a total of 12 possible credits. Third year of the program, which offers an
additional 6 college credits, is available for students who have maintained a strong GPA and demonstrated
strong interest.
Culinary Arts 2 Years 3 credits Prerequisites: None.
Culinary Arts prepares students for careers that support Maine’s Hospitality Industry. Students learn concepts
in food preparation and restaurant management. In this two year program, emphasis is placed on maintaining a
healthy environment through sanitation training and workplace wellness. Knowledge is applied through
catering school and public functions. Participation in our public restaurant continues to develop competencies.
Students earn ServeSafe Manager Certification upon successful completion of the National Restaurant
Association Exam. Students are encouraged to participate in SkillsUSA (student organization) to enhance their
leadership opportunities and compete at both state and national levels. Integrated Credit: Science & VPA
Articulation agreements are available with Culinary Institute of America and all Maine Community
College culinary programs.
Early Childhood Development 1 Year 3 credits Prerequisites: None
I
The one-year Early Childhood I Program prepares individuals to provide care and guidance of young children
under the supervision of professional personnel. Students study the introductory ideas and concepts of Early
Childhood Education from birth to grade 3 in an academic classroom. Students plan, organize and conduct
activities for children to promote physical, interpersonal, motor, mental, and social growth and development.
Supervised students operate a preschool program three sessions per week, and complete an in depth case
study using the Maine Early Learning and Developmental Standards of a preschool child Students have the
opportunity to obtain CPR, First Aid, and Servsafe Food Handler Certifications and Mandated Reporter
Training. Integrated Credit: Science
70
Table of Contents