SOURCE: https://www.rsu5.org/fs/resource-manager/view/40e4afc2-d2cc-4d22-92ba-f7671b347143
SECTION: /board-of-directors-and-policies/board-agendas-and-minutes/agendas
TITLE: August 25, 2021
TYPE: Finalsite-PDF
============================================================

DRAFT
RSU 5 Reopening Plans for 2021-2022
August 25, 2021
Part I: Planning Assumptions
Based on available information as of August 16, 2021, it is reasonable and prudent for K-12
schools to create contingency plans based on the following assumptions.
The virus that causes COVID-19 currently remains in circulation. During this time:
a. Implementing measures to prevent or mitigate transmission of COVID-19 within a
school setting will be needed.
b. Additional waves of infection are to be expected, possibly coinciding with flu
season.
c. Short-term closures of single or multiple schools will remain a possibility.
d. Children and staff with significant health conditions will continue to be especially
vulnerable during this time.
e. Teaching and reinforcing prevention behaviors (handwashing and cough/sneeze
etiquette) and promoting flu vaccinations will continue to be important strategies
in slowing the spread of this and other infectious diseases.
f. Use of masks will be needed for all school staff and students- regardless of
whether or not they are vaccinated until such time that there is guidance for being
able to unmask safely.
Understanding these assumptions, RSU 5 has created a flexible learning plan that will govern
how school and educational programming will operate based upon the external conditions that
exist across the State and Cumberland and Androscoggin County. This plan is purposefully
“fluid” and provides specific guidance as to how the school system will operate based on
external conditions. These plans have been divided into two core levels and are outlined below.
1

Part II: Flexible Learning Plan Outline with Levels
The Superintendent will determine the levels based on Maine CDC and Maine Department
of Education guidelines.
Level RED - This level will be used for when
certain classes or grade levels will need to
stay home for quarantining reasons.
Level Green - All students will be present for
five day a week in person learning.
For each of the levels indicated, RSU 5 has developed plans for how educational programming
will operate. These plans are outlined below using focused domains to organize the specific
areas and conditions that must exist in each in order to operate programming.
Families will be asked to self-screen their children before dropping them off at school or
placing them on the school bus.
(Green) - Extra precautions such as hand washing will continue. Visitors will be allowed in
buildings. All staff and students will be required to wear masks indoors.
Domain Description/Considerations
Type of ● RSU5 PK-5 Plan
2

Instructional ● 6-8 Plan
Programming. ● 9-12 Plan
● RSU5 will continue to follow Maine CDC guidelines.
● Regular face to face instruction.
● Additional specialized programming may be requiredto assist specific
students in catching up.
Technology ● During this time, technology staff will make suretechnology repairs are
made to laptops, upgrades are made to software, anddevices are fully
functional.
Staffing ● Continued frequent hand washing and masking will berequired by all
students and staff.
● Staff who are experiencing ANY symptoms will be asked to remain
home.
● All staff will be required to work on site.
● There may be increased staff duties depending on current
circumstances.
Special Education ● Regular special education programming will continuefor all students.
● Additional services may need to be provided for specificstudents.
● IEP meetings will be held in person or virtually.
Gifted and Talented ● Regular programming will continue.
Adult Education ● Regular programming will continue.
Enrichment ● Regular programming will continue.
Programs
Recreation ● Regular programming will continue.
Programs
Laugh & Learn ● Regular programming will continue.
● Additional guidance is provided byDHHSfor childcare licensing. Laugh
& Learn programs will adhere to additional COVID-specificguidelines as
applicable.
Response to ● Regular programming will continue.
Intervention ● Additional specialized programs may need to be offeredto help students
catch up.
● Intervention support will follow the typical 6 weekcycle approach of data
collection, review, and adjustment of plans.
Facilities ● Common surfaces will continue to be sanitized regularly.
● Staff will ensure there is an adequate amount of cleaningsupplies
available at all times.
● Bathrooms will be sanitized regularly.
● All other regular facility use may resume with slightmodifications as
necessary to be determined by the administrative team.
● Ventilation:
3

○ Utilize air filters with the highest level of efficiency that are compatible
with our equipment;
○ Verify all equipment is working to original specifications;
○ Increase ventilation running time from eight hoursto seventeen hours.
Transportation
● Students and bus drivers will be required to wearmasks on buses when
students are on board.
● The first and last windows on both sides of the buswill be opened while
students are on board.
School Nutrition ● All school meals are free for all students throughFY 22, irrespective of
whether they are served in school or consumed at home.
● RSU 5 will provide meals in accordance withUSDA school meal rules
and waiversfor meal patterns and eligibility.
● Serving methods, schedules, routines, locations anddistancing will be
adjusted, if necessary, to comply with most currentCDC and/or district
guidelines. These may vary from school to school.
● Students that are learning at home because they areisolated or
quarantined due to COVID-19 will be offered mealsfor all remote
learning days.
School Health ● Nurses will assist in enforcing good hygiene practicesby all
Offices students/staff.
● Nurses will ensure that PPEs are available in theirschools.
● Nurses will continue to enforce processes for students/staffreturning to
school after having been out due to illness associatedwith COVID-19.
● Nurses will continue to monitor data and report anyincreases in
COVID-19 related symptoms to the building principal.
● Students and/or school staff that are displaying symptomsof Covid 19
will be separated from healthy students and staff.
● When students/staff arrive at school sick, nurseswill send them home
immediately.
● Commonly touched surfaces, such as counters and cots,will be cleaned
with appropriate disinfectant after each student/staffinteraction in that
area.
● Cleaning of all surfaces in the nurses clinic willbe done by custodial staff
daily, including the floors.
Co Curricular ● All programs resume.
Programs ● May need to modify some programs to ensure that allState and CDC
guidelines are followed.
Athletic Programs ● All programs will resume in-person. May need to modifysome programs
to ensure that all State and CDC guidelines are followed.
Crowd/spectator sizes may be limited to follow Stateand CDC
guidelines.
4

Remote Learning There is no remote learning option, unless there areindividual circumstances
Option which will be handled through an IEP process or a504 plan.
Level 1 (Red) - At this level, schools, grade level or classrooms will be provided with remote
learning.
Domain Description/Considerations
Type of ● Distance learning onlyvia asynchronous/synchronousmethods.
Instructional ● Specific learning “expectations and guidelines” willbe set per grade level
Programming. similar to current:
○ PK-5 Learning Guidelines
○ 6-8 learning guidelines
○ 9-12 learning guidelines
Technology ● All students have access to devices for utilizationat home. Families in
need of assistance with technology will reach outto the Technology
Department for assistance.
● Technology help is available at thislink:
● Staff will utilize technology support ticket systemK-12 for all tech related
problems.
● Google classroom will remain the common platform forstudent work in
grades PreK-12.
● Student google emails will be opened up for grades3-12 with restrictions
for grades 3-4.
● Any use of Video Conferencing will followRSU5 PROTOCOLS.
● RSU5 has a technology landing page with resourcesfor staff, students,
and parents.
● Technology staff will provide tutorials and professionaldevelopment to
staff so they can utilize the online apps selected.
● Staff will clean/disinfect devices in accordance withMDOE/CDC
guidelines.
● Assistance will be provided in instruction to studentswho have limited
experience with keyboarding or with technology.
● Assistance will be provided in instruction for parentsto access technology.
Staffing ● All district school staff are considered “essentialstaff.”
● All sick/personal time should be recorded using usualprotocols.
5

● “High Risk” individuals who normally would be on site working (custodians,
nutrition, etc.) may be allowed to remain home withspecific permission
from the Superintendent.
● Teachers and educational technicians and other instructionalsupport
personnel work from home but may be allowed to enterbuildings for
specific reasons as long as scheduled through buildingprincipals.
● Nutrition staff will continue to prepare and providemeals. All workers at
the production and distribution sites will followthe most currentCDC
COVID-19guidelines for food and employee safety.
● Bus Drivers will be assigned maintenance or cleaningwork.
● Other personnel may be assigned work outside of theirnormal
performance responsibilities or areas.
● All staff are required to be available during normalwork hours and will be
provided with clear guidance on notice of, and expectationsfor, flexible
hours (e.g., work outside “normal” hours, if necessary).
● Administrative offices will remain closed to the publicalthough personnel
may be at the offices to perform essential duties.
● Staff working on site will use protective gear, continuewith proper hand
washing techniques, and ensure proper physical distancingwhenever
feasible.
● Shared food will be restricted to commercially-producedand served by
one primary person using precautions. Employees whobring their own
meals must wipe down appliances after each use. Employeesmust
maintain six feet social distancing when in commonareas such as a
teachers’ room.
Special Education ● DOE guidance will be followed and shared with staffand parents.
● IEP meetings will be held virtually.
FAPE ● RSU 5 Special Education staff will provide FAPE tostudents with
Individualized Education Plans.
● RSU5 will continue to provide accommodations for studentswith IEPs/504
plans.
Instruction & ● Student formal and informal data will be collected(as feasible) to track
Services, & IEP student progress in meeting IEP goals.
● When needed, special education staff will provideconsultations to general
education teachers to support students with disabilities.
● Special education staff will provide consultations,resources, and office
hours to families to help support students receivingvirtual learning.
● Staff will assess and document student progress towardmeeting IEP
goals.
● Staff will provide speech, OT/PT, social work servicesaccording to the
student's IEPs.
Evaluations ● Initial and triennial evaluations will be administeredin-person.
Gifted and Talented ● GaTE support will be provided to all identified GaTEstudents via remote
or in person learning aligned in the same manner theyare normally
delivered.
● Specific intervention/extension activities will beprovided to students as
needed.
● GaTE teachers will continue to collaborate with thestudent’s teachers.
● GaTE identification process may be modified basedon whether students
are back in school and what assessment data are available
6

Response to ● Student data reviews will be conducted to determinethe need for SAT
Intervention referrals.
● Intervention support for qualified students will beprovided remotely by RtI
staff in collaboration with teachers.
○ Support provided approximately 1-2 times per weekin addition to
regular education support.
● Students may be added to caseloads based on academicand SEL needs.
Adult Education ● HiSET testing preparation will be held via video meets.
● As necessary, utilize a list of AE offices providing in-person testing
(maintained by state AE office).
● College success courses will be held via video meets.
● Advising/counseling will be provided via video meets.
● English learners’ instruction will be provided via video meets.
● Other online programs such as Hi-SET Academy may be used to provide
instructional materials for adult learners.
● CTE courses that can be offered online will be; othersmay be canceled or
postponed.
Enrichment ● In-person enrichment courses will not be held.
Programs ● Instructors who are able and willing to offer programsin a virtual
environment may do so.
Recreation ● In-person recreation programs will not be held.
Programs ● Instructors who are able and willing to offer programsin a virtual
environment may do so.
Laugh & Learn ● Follow Maine CDC Child Care Guidelines. 4/28/21 versionhere.
● No in-person programs will be held.
● Preschool teachers will establish one or more “MorningCircle” meetings.
● Preschool teachers will communicate with familiesat least twice each
week.
Student/Family ● Social work services for existing caseloads will continue.
Mental Health ● School counselors will reach out to students/familiesregarding SEL and
mental health support.
● School counselors will accept new student referralsfor SEL support.
● School counselors will refer students to the school’sSAT, CARE teams as
needed.
● SAT and CARE teams will determine further action basedon
student/family needs.
● School counselors and/or social workers will identifyand refer students to
outside mental health programs and agencies as necessary.
● School staff or SRO can provide “wellness checks”as needed to
students/families.
Staff Mental Health ● Staff can seek support from administrators and/orMember Assistance
Program.
● Member Assistance Program will be posted on RSU5 website.
● School guidance counselors and/or school nurses willinformally check on
staff.
7

Facilities ● Close communication between facilities director andprincipals/staff is
needed to ensure coordination of the safe use of facilities.
● Custodial workers continue to work daily.
● Custodians provide daily cleaning of commonly touchedsurfaces used
during the day (office spaces, photocopiers, mainentrance doors, phones,
etc.).
● Custodians will continue to do regular cleaning ofall spaces daily
● The most currentCDC COVID-19 Recommendations forCleaning and
Disinfection of Community Facilitieswill be followed.
Transportation ● Some school buses/vans may be used to transport foodfor the School
Nutrition Program.
● Bus/Van drivers will be allowed to sign up for rotationsfor School Nutrition
Program work. Those not assigned to SNP or other “delivery” work will be
assigned other maintenance/custodial work and paidaccording to
negotiated contracts.
● Buses/vans not in use will be thoroughly cleaned andparked at the
transportation garage.
● Buses/vans being used for transport as part of specificschool nutrition
program requirements or mail delivery, etc. will becleaned before each
use according to theCDC COVID-19 Recommendationsfor Cleaning and
Disinfection of Community Facilities.
School Nutrition ● All school meals are free for all students throughSY 22, irrespective of
whether they are served in school or consumed at home.
● Eligibility and availability of meals to familiesduring a school closure will
be in accordance with the most currentUSDA school meal rules and
waivers.
● Availability of meals during school closures willbe communicated to
parents, staff, students and the community as soonas they are available.
● RSU5 will continue to coordinate with local, countyand state resources to
ensure that student needs are met during any schoolclosures.
● All workers at the production and distribution siteswill follow the most
current COVID-19 guidance for food and employee safety.
School Health ● Health offices are closed during this time.
Offices ● School nurses are available to address student medicalissues when
appropriate (situations that require communicationbetween school nurse
and school staff).
● School nurses will contact staff and provide medicaladvice to address
students’ medical and mental health needs.
● School nurses will connect families with communityor agency resources
to address family situations and needs.
● School nurses will collaborate with teachers to addressstudent specific
health concerns during remote learning.
● School nurses will contact families to support studentswith chronic or
underlying medical conditions.
● School nurses will be in contact and communicationwith DOE Nurse
Consultant.
● School nurses will be in contact with Maine CDC andlocal medical
8

professionals.
● School nurses will serve as a resource to staff relatedto current Covid 19
research.
● School nurses will assist with delivery of the schoollunch program as
needed.
Co Curricular
Programs ● Red Co-Curricular Planwill be followed.
Athletic Programs ● RSU5 Athletic Dept - Distance Learning Plan - Level 1 RED
9