the most vocal parents , but are we listening to our students and teachers. Teachers to it. I am tired of hearing we know you are working hard, but if you rethink this you even caught our breath. Thanks and I hope you
of our classrooms. The custodial staff rocks and they are doing and students are on the front line. Let us determine how to best proceed with this new platform. Give us a chance to can work harder. It's now a joke at the high school. WE KNOW YOU ARE will listen to your staff. We really love our kids
Freeport High School great work at keepiing things clean. breathe! WORKING HARD, BUT WE NEED YOU TO WORK HARDER. and will always do what is best for them.
10

What building do you
spend most of your
time at? What has gone well so far since September? What have been your biggest challenges? What are your ideas for improvement? What are your other comments or concerns?
1) We are currently one of the only districts that do not have a day of office hours to
work with kids. Our district is prioritizing five days of in-person instruction a week It is incredibly disheartening to keep hearing that
over student support. Having 1 remote day a week for students and staff where we teachers need to do more and be better at the
either have office hours all day or a half-day to connect with students and parents is hybrid plan. I hear teachers feeling discouraged
1) The students have been incredibly compliant about mask- essential if we are going to catch the kids who are currently slipping through the because they are doing their best and working
wearing. While they are not as good about remaining socially 1) Lack of office hours we had in the spring: time to work with students has been a challenge. In the spring we were given cracks. Otherwise, teachers aren't going to be able to chase kids for missing work incredibly hard to make this all work, but feel they
distanced, they seem to understand the reasons behind the office hours to check in with students who are not showing up or turning in work, and this was invaluable and was the reason because we barely have time to grade the work students are missing. are getting the message that it's not good
masks and do not challenge them. why many of my students were able to pass my class. I called parents frequently and had zoom sessions with failing kids to enough. Parents are concerned about their kids
help them get back on track. Now, I don't have the time to give feedback to students as I did in the spring, and advisory 2) Connected to the first idea, we should be able to practice the red schedule so not being in school enough, and rightly so. We
2) Synchronous teaching has allowed me to teach my classes period is not sufficient as many of my students attend Region 10 and can't make callbacks. I think the result of this lack of students and staff feel confident and comfortable with it if we go into red longer are also in the middle of a pandemic, and what's
as normally as possible in the hybrid model. I think I am getting office hours to help students will be student failures, which seems like something that is avoidable if we were given this time term. This could happen in the days leading up to holiday breaks. best for some kids isn't what's best for all. I see
through much of the same material I would be getting through in to support our students who are learning remotely half the time. my struggling learners floundering and not
a normal setting. Students are now getting used to this style of 3) I have not seen my own parents since the school year started and do not feel turning in work, and I can't help them because
learning and I have fewer technology problems on their end and 2) Teachers are doing so incredibly much right now and are getting burnt out and it's only October. We keep hearing from comfortable visiting them on holidays without getting a Covid test first. This will be they have Region 10 during the day and are
mine than I did earlier in the year. administrators that they are proud of the work we are doing and that we're superheroes, etc. etc., but there has been no close to impossible if we are in the building on those days before vacation. Making missing out on the advisory period. Are five days
effort from the district to alleviate some of our stress. Everything is still business as usual, but teachers are drowning. We those days remote learning days would give students and staff practice with that of instruction and no support time to work with
3) Administration at FHS has been supportive of teachers and need more than an acknowledgment of our efforts: we need to feel supported by the district making more visible and schedule while also giving staff the opportunity to get a Covid test before the their teachers really what's best for these types
Freeport High School acknowledging that we need more time to support students. actionable steps to support teachers. holidays so we can be with our families. of kids?
Teachers voices aren't being heard/taken into
hybrid learning, planning, catching up with kids who have missed classes, remote learning plans, understanding/adapting to Sticking with something for a while, letting us get our feet under us before making consideration when deciding what is
Freeport High School Small classes = more one on one time with students the administrative expectations (hybrid plus), the time it takes to plan, set up google classroom, etc changes and more demands manageable.
It is extremely challenging to develop lessons for
in person and remote. It is essentially teaching
twice as many classes. Jen Gulko and Charlie
Mellon have been outstanding leaders
throughout this entire situation. Should we be
Fridays need to be used for student outreach and teacher planning. High school checking academic eligibility during a pandemic?
students can be remote unless on an IEP. Structured targeted outreach in the It is understood that academics are a priority,
Freeport High School Communication from administration to staff. Student behavior. Only seeing the students once a week. Finding time to grade assessments and enter grades into the gradebook. morning with teacher planning in the afternoon. however at what cost to the student.
-It has been really important to get to see students face to face
to start building relationships with new students and strengthen
relationships with students I’ve had before, especially in light of
the stressors of the pandemic.
-Additionally, as one of the teachers who was out on
quarantine, I want to point out that the fact that we kept the - Quarantine was hard physically and mentally. I was really not prepared for it, but I learned a lot, and by the end I had
virus from spreading means that we all (teachers, students, a system that felt effective and was able to learn how to use some new tools to connect with kids and push the learning -If we’re going to plus, previously non-synchronous teachers need time to learn to
families, and admin) are doing the right thing to keep everyone forward. But it was extremely physically hard to be tied to my computer all day. I would meet with students online for 20-40 use the technology effectively and time to think about how to implement this. Every
safe. I am worried that if there is a big push to get more minutes (they either projected me, or everyone was on Meet), and then leave the Meet open for them to ask questions while teacher needs access to the necessary technology (snowball mics, multiple
students into the building, next time we will not be so lucky. they worked, and then everyone got back together for the final 10 minutes of class to check in. I have never been more screens, etc.), training to use them, and time to plan how best to use them in our
-I feel like I am finally hitting my stride in the classroom (digitally physically miserable in my life. I couldn’t even get up and go get a snack without feeling like I needed to take my computer class, both working on our own and with teachers who have been doing more of the
and in person), where I can predict what will work and what with me. I cannot see how this is fine for teenagers. Even at school, they change classes, they walk down the hall to the synchronous work. Just throwing that at us with no time to implement it well it is Please stop telling us how awesome we are and
won’t, where I am building and maintaining routines, where we’ bathroom, they go outside(!) when they have to move from one side of the building to another. To have them sit all day in going to cause huge waves of stress throughout the faculty. If we’re going to do how hard we’re working and how amazing it is
re making good progress and kids feel supported. It has been a front of a computer is physically draining, and I am sure the amount of input that comes to them from online meetings is also this, we want to do it well. we’re giving 10% more than any other district
steep learning curve, but I am finally getting into my groove and mentally exhausting. It was for me! And it was bad for my mental health too. Completely draining in a way that being in the -We need more time to work with struggling kids. We knew going into this that there near us, and then immediately following it with
finding the pattern to my days. classroom is not. The idea of having them sit at home in front of their computers all day long on their at-home days just would be a significant number of students who would struggle with the online “But what can we do differently?” That is
-I felt like parent conferences went well. I was completely makes me sick to my stomach now that I’ve experienced it. More synchronous experiences, where they have to be online at learning days, but the district plan did not account for that. (I am specifically not extremely demoralizing to hear – “but” negates
booked both days (as usual), but I did get to talk to some a certain time, may help SOME kids, but it is not going to fix the academic issues for most of them, and it will very well make referring to students with IEPs/504s, who have supports built in, but students everything that came before it. It makes it clear
parents that I really needed to talk to. things worse for others. What problem are we trying to solve by implementing the "more synchronous time" solution? If it's without disabilities who nevertheless are struggling). In a normal year, the allotted that whatever we do, however hard we work, no
- The smaller class sizes have greatly impacted what just to get kids more contact with teachers...to what end? Is it quantity of interaction, or quality? Do the benefits of seeing time is enough to take care of most kids, but this year is not normal. Failing to plan matter how many new things we’re trying and
happens in my classroom. I am able to *routinely* sit down one teachers on a screen really outweigh the physical and mental effects of so much computer time? for this has created a crisis for our most vulnerable students, and teachers, as improving every single day – none of those will
on one with every student in my class and conference over the - I am swamped with grading and feedback. There are so many things that I would normally never take up that I have to usual, are being asked to figure out how to fix it, without letting anything else go. ever be enough. That line of conversation is
material we're covering. (I wear my face shield and try to sit at check when students are doing them at home - in class I can just look over their shoulders and give them feedback on the Something has got to give, and I don’t want it to be the students’ learning or toxic, and we do not feel supported by the board
least 3 feet away). I have been able to fix misconceptions, spot, but when it's online, I have to look into it to see who's struggling. This has made an enormous change in my workload, teachers’ mental health. With the high school’s red plan, it feels like there is time to or administration when they say it. Stop pushing
answer questions privately, and bolster confidence in students with the addition of planning what those digital lessons will look like (pretty much everything I do those days is new to me, not help kids built into the day from the get go – we’ll be able to spend a significant us to be “better” – we’re going to get there on our
to a degree that has never happened before. I know exactly much that I can reuse from prior years, because the delivery needs to be so different to be effective). I am drowning in portion of our afternoon working one on one or in small groups with students so that own, especially if you give us the tools and the
who is ready for an assessment and who will need a callback assignments, and because of that, I am not able to give students the kind of feedback they need on their at-home work. And everyone gets what they need. It is a bad sign when I am about ready to sacrifice time we need to do so. None of us are
first, and I know what they'll need to work on with me vs. what if my goal is to make that at-home work engaging and the right amount of challenging (rather than just comfortable review), I the face-to-face time of the yellow plan for the extra time to help students in the red complacent in this year, happy to just let things
they'll be able to practice on their own. I know kids are getting really do have to take the feedback part seriously, which takes a ton of time. I could back off on that and slow down the plan. With things as they stand now, it feels impossible to have both. go. We are pushing ourselves every day and
less time with me, but the time they are getting is a much higher curriculum and not assign things that require feedback - but that's such a disservice to the students' learning that I struggle -The thing that both of these “ideas for improvement” have in common? Time. innovating all the time, because it’s what’s good
quality. And I know students value that time and the strong with letting myself do that. Time to meet with students. Time to call parents. Time to learn new things for kids. Because that’s what we do and where
relationships we are building even through masks and face - My internet at home is terrible. I live in a rural area and this is the best it gets here - our ISP has told me there is ourselves. Time to work with each other as we innovate in our classrooms every our focus is. When we're asking for time, we're
shields. Students feel supported and know that I know what nothing else they can do. It's fine for now, in that I can make videos at home and come to school to upload them, but I am single day. Time to provide meaningful feedback. Time that will directly benefit not whining about the workload - we need that
they need. I am wondering to myself about how I can maintain really worried about my network capability if it comes to red and I am expected to be at home on Google Meets / Zoom all students as much as teachers. Time that we do not have right now. Can we borrow time because it will directly impact student
this practice when things are back to normal, just because it has day. (As a point of comparison - a 5 minute video takes 3 hours to upload on a good day at my house - at school, it's less ideas from the red plan to get some of that time, for teachers to do the things we learning. Trust us, as professionals, to do what’s
been such a good thing to come out of our situation this year. than 30 seconds. The difference is significant.) need to do to? The burden of innovation at this scale should not fall to teachers. Be best for us and our students, and help us get the
Freeport High School creative. tools we need to do so.
11

What building do you
spend most of your
time at? What has gone well so far since September? What have been your biggest challenges? What are your ideas for improvement? What are your other comments or concerns?
It's important for the Board to know that it is very
hard to balance the well-being and stress of the
staff with the learning needs of the students. We
care about all of our school community members
and want all of them to feel supported during the
times of Covid. Teachers are exhausted and
working their best to come up with creative
solutions every single day for how to teach right
now. But with that, some students are still
struggling at home and need more...more
support, more contact with their teachers, more
of everything. Sometimes what is best for
students means an incredible amount of more
work and stress for our teachers. Sometimes
what would help the teachers is taking away from
the students. It feels very hard to be an
administrator and try to support both parties at
such a challenging time. For me, kids come first
as they are the reason that we are here. But kids
can't be successful without healthy, positive,
functioning teachers and adults leading the way
at school. The balance between supporting our
students and supporting our teachers and staff is
I think there should be a date announced for how long we'll be in the yellow plan. I what is keeping me (and all of our RSU5
The biggest challenge by far is the sense of uncertainty. In the spring, we knew that we would be out of school and in the think that would bring some sense of certainty to staff (i.e. I believe Yarmouth administrators) up at night. I wish I had a
Cooperation from students for the Covid protocols has been "red plan" once it was announced that we were not going back. Teachers are significantly worried about the talk of going announced that they would be in "yellow" until at least January). Then when the solution to this but I don't. It's just important to
outstanding. The kids have done really well with the health and from yellow to maybe green and then to red if there's positive cases...it's really unsettling. We can't control the positive date that was announced comes, we reevaluate if we stay in that plan. Teachers me that the Board knows that we are in this
Freeport High School safety protocols. cases but we may be able to provide some certainty for staff. are planners by nature and concrete deadlines really help their mental states. dichotomy right now.
Well for me, I am MOST concerned about what
I have been able to see and interact with the high school teachers from a distance. will become of my students after December.
They are over-worked, over-whelmed and working tirelessly to survive and do the When the CARES money runs out, I will no
best job they can. I am so worried for them when the question is: "What more can longer have a job - I will not be returning to in-
So I am working remotely with our remote students and we do?" "How can we improve?" Very often, questions such as these are answered person education. Will all the remote students
families. What has gone well is my classes/teaching. The by putting more work on teachers' plates. By having to prepare both in person and be asked to return in person? The semester
experience this fall is light years better than the spring. The digital lessons, teachers have essentially doubled their preparation work. And ends at the end of January, and thus I will not be
vast majority of students are attending regularly, are engaged synchronous teachers are doubling their attendance and bookkeeping work. I have able to complete the semester with my students.
and succeeding. And while I'd like to have more direct teaching had many private conversations where teachers have used words like: constant, This is very hard for me to take, and seems like
time (2 or 3 classes a week as opposed to 1 or 2), as far as the overwhelming, crazy, non-stop, incessant, unmanageable, impossible, exhausting very, very poor educational practice. Two of my
curriculum, I am not that far behind where I normally would be etc... This pandemic is what it is. It is presenting all of us with many challenges. classes are semester classes, and two are year-
in a non-covid year. So that is good. I am also acting as a There is only so much that teachers can do to make things better - so, so much of long classes. In my 30 years of teaching, I have
liaison for all remote students and their families. There have The biggest challenges have been to engage the students who have not been attending. As stated above, most students this is outside of our control, or anyone's control for that matter. Maybe a better never had to abandon students mid-stream.
been more challenges here in that remote learning really (not just those who are in my classes) are doing well, but we have some students whose attendance and participation has question here would be, "What are our ideas for surviving all this in as healthy a way While I know that we have many capable
requires self-discipline and adhering to a strict schedule, and as been quite troublesome. Now many of these students would most likely be in a similar situation if they were attending in- as we can?" None of us can make little improvements to alter the basic reality of teachers who can get these kids to the finish line,
Freeport High School we know, not all high school students fully embrace these traits. person, but that being said, this remains our biggest challenge. this pandemic. it is still very concerning for me.
The biggest challenge is the amount of time it takes to plan for each lesson. With two cohorts, we have double the amount of
groups. That means posting for each group separately. Not all lessons can be the same for all groups. Cohort A is in
person first, then at home second. Cohort B is at home first and in-person second. This usually means that I have to create
two separate lesson sequences because the order in which a lesson sequence goes is not easily flip-flopped. I need to
create videos to explain work to at-home students because I cannot take the class time to explain it to them virtually. This
takes time. Posting everything for each group takes much more time than expected. Due to this demand on my time for
planning, giving timely feedback suffers. There is always a lot of work to look at, comment on, grade, and give back so that
students have the feedback they need to move forward in their learning. I am not giving feedback at the rate that I would
normally be able to do.
Not seeing students on a more regular basis is a challenge that continues to deepen, the more time we spend in school. For
students who have fallen behind, catching up is an enormous struggle.
There is an atmosphere of teamwork among the staff that has Challenges with using technology are a major struggle. Sometimes students cannot understand what I am saying when they I'm very concerned about the upcoming holiday
strengthened. It was already strong, and it continues to grow. are remote and attending class virtually. They say they cannot always hear me clearly. We use the chat feature and type, season, social gatherings and indoor settings
People help one another without hesitation. Students have but this slows down the conversation tremendously. may create more opportunities for COVID to
been very kind and they seem very appreciative of our efforts. spread.
Social distancing at the High School is not easy. In classrooms it is fine. In the hallways during passing time, it is not
Smaller cohorts offer more opportunities to work with students happening. It is nearly impossible to keep people 3 ft apart. I feel like we are doing the best we can, and it is okay that it is not perfect. I do not I am very concerned about students who are
Freeport High School one-on-one during class time. This has been fantastic. have specific ideas for solutions. falling behind.
Freeport Middle continue to work in yellow and find ways to connect the kids at school with the Great job so far RSU 5 keeping students and
School hybrid yellow, transitioning to red when needed. shortage of teachers and subs students at home. staff safe!
We are learning and changing when needed so as long as we stay positive we will
Freeport Middle Trying to figure out who has remote meals out the back door and who is eating at school and also who is taking meals home make this situation work.I am just blessed to have this job and able to come to work Erin needs a vacation she has done a AMAZING
School My staff coming to work everyday!!! at the end of the day.My Boss is great so we are managing. every day. job through all of this!!!!
12

What building do you
spend most of your
time at? What has gone well so far since September? What have been your biggest challenges? What are your ideas for improvement? What are your other comments or concerns?
I think we need to continue to check in with staff and ask staff what they need. Gen
ed teachers need to work with and understand that special ed are supporting kids of Ray is amazing and a huge support for our
Freeport Middle It is going well, kind of busy and feel like I am putting out fires Staffing and supporting kids who have chosen to be remote, are at home and synchronous while supporting in person kids all grade levels, ability levels all at once. We need to continue to work together to do students and staff. FMS is incredibly lucky to
School everywhere all day long. who I have SDI with me or are 5 days a week now. There is not enough time for everyone. the best for our students. have him.
Administrators have been supportive about
finding creative ways to meet the needs of the
Balancing all of the different needs with students working in hybrid, plus some fully remote and some in the building 5 days. students and staff. Our building has the absolute
Teachers working hard to provide students what they need. Special educators work with students across various grade levels, so scheduling to see students to give adequate support is best principal and assistant principal around, and
Freeport Middle Small class sizes are more conducive to learning and reduce an absolute nightmare. There is not a dsignated special ed teacher to support our fully remote students, which poses the Hire a specific special educator to service all the remote students, and fill the open the special ed team is phenomenal (including ed
School social/emotional stress on students. biggest problem, along with not enough ed tech support. ed tech position. techs).
Ray Grogan and others have been great. He's a
Freeport Middle Has it gone well considering the situation and the fine leader with a strong sense of what's
School accompanying challenges? Yes. Balancing in-class and remote. More and better use of the technology I already have. It's about integrating ideas. important.
One of the unforeseen benefits to social distancing and mask The biggest challenge for me has been finding space in the building to work with remote students. We have a schedule for
Freeport Middle wearing has been fewer discipline issues. That’s been a nice room use, but it is sometimes not followed and therefore leaves one searching for a spot at the last moment. One morning I One way to improve the space challenge would be to be allowed to use my lunch The kids have been great about wearing their
School change. did a remote activity from inside the supply closet. break to travel home and do my afternoon remote work from there. masks. I have been pleasantly surprised.
Technology issues, having to switch to synchronous classes with very little notice, developing lessons that work for both in-
school students and students who are joining from home, juggling three screens to be able to see the students who are at
The students have been patient, mask breaks are working well, home, project for the students in class, and manipulate slides/documents/Google Classroom, teaching with a mask on, being I'll be the first to admit that I don't know what I don't know...I don't know what
we have sufficient cleaning supplies to disinfect after every able to hear students when they ask or answer questions (voices muffled by mask), general exhaustion after teaching in this technology will help with the delivery of instruction, I don't know how to be able to
Freeport Middle class, having supportive and understanding administrators who weird way all day, then going home to spend hours working on the lesson for the next day, grading student work after hear the quiet kids who can't talk loudly enough to overcome the mask muffle, I
School do everything they can to make this all work... spending hours working on lessons... don't know how to add more hours to the day so I can get a good night's sleep...
Freeport Middle Getting myself familiar with Google Classroom, Big Ideas Math(the curriculum), Power School and all the technology
School The support from staff and our principals. involved with teaching synchronous. Each day it is getting better. Workshop time to better our instruction using technology
Students are not social distancing. It is an
Losing valuable class time while spending time on technology issues during synchronous classes. Only giving students who unreasonable/infeasible expectation with half the
are in the classroom half of my attention is frustrating, as I think they deserve more from the little time they are in school. kids in the school. This will only worsen if/when
Technology support and training has been helpful. We will improve with time, I'm sure. we add more students. It is not for lack of trying.
It is difficult as an adult to adhere to the
Balancing understanding with accountability when students do not show up to online classes. Also, finding time to locate Some synchronous and some asynchronous classes. An entire day behind a guidelines (which are not followed because we
Mask wearing has gone smoothly, as all students happily wear these students while still teaching the two groups (online and in-person). screen is exhausting for students and teachers. would not be able to get from one side of the
their masks each day. Students are patient and excited to be in room to the other following the guidelines). It is
Freeport Middle school. Staff are happy to see kids. Overall, it is very nice to For students who don't attend classes regularly from home, where is the time for remediation and/or catching up on what Consistency in which classes are/are not synchronous. Classes should not move in impossible as a student to remain three feet
School be back! they missed in class. and out of synchronous learning as it is confusing for students. apart. It is just not happening with consistency.
Stop holding remote-day UA classes. This prevents SpEd students from accessing
Structured Study. I appreciate the strategy of assigning work that can be completed
FMS is extremely organized and efficient, everyone works The pace of the lessons is great for kids who are on or above grade level, but its too fast for the SpEd students. There isn't within the allotted class time, but this isn't realistic and prevents SpEd students from
together to solve problems. The 6th grade staff is amazing, their any time to plan and organize since everything is meant to be done during the period that it is assigned. When our students accessing assistance. Students are also unable to plan and develop strategies for
Freeport Middle online and in-person lessons are great. Teachers have been are home, that means that they are trying to complete assignments independently. Most of them are not at that stage of completing their work since everything is in real time. Create longer periods of time
School very collaborative with SpEd. learning yet. The assignments then pile up. between assignments.
It's been a smoother start than I anticipated. Technology
support at FMS is fantastic and we were ready to begin the
Freeport Middle year. We had a plan and it has worked great thus far. The Trying to manage students in class and students zooming in from home. The extra planning to have multiple classes in Sometimes I think we are trying to do too much
School smaller class sizes are amazing for teaching and learning. multiple places as well as in class and at home. and we just need to keep it simple.
Continue to have opportunities to work through managing best practices for all in
pandemic teaching. It is new, it won’t be the same and expectations will also have PD design day, staff meetings and open forums
Freeport Middle Managing the original hybrid model and having enough staff Going into hybrid- plus. It doesn’t feel sustaining for staff or students. Too much screen time for kids at home and frenetic to be fluid and reasonable for the economic, social and health crisis we are living in to help design and make school a more
School development of time to get it going effectively. pace, organizational overload and lack of effective dual- classroom engagement. right now. sustainable place to work and learn.
In talking with other districts, it sound like having one full day remotely each week to Teacher burnout due to teacher shortages and
collaborate with students, prepare, meet, etc. has been beneficial. Our 5 day a week lack of subs is a HUGE issue. I worry about how
Finding a balance between both students in person and remote. It is extremely challenging trying to instuct students within schedule feels overwhelming and creates difficulties when alignging classroom work long teachers can endure the current tasks of
Freeport Middle conneting with students in person, increase in technology the classroom and remotely- especially with unique learning needs. Teachers seem exhausted and overwhelmed- there are (the alternating Fridays puts classes off schedule). I think adding in a full remote day synchronous learning, new technology, screen
School understanding and use of technology across all settings so many new demands and little time to find tune them. could help with that. time, and overall stress of the current pandemic.
Maybe consistency across the district with regard
to focus on particular software(web-based and
Big changes need time for planning, implementation, and problem-solving. This fall nonweb-based) and/or hardware so there could
Freeport Middle Continuity! Many disruptions to class schedule (move to remote model in September, then NWEA testing immediately upon felt like too much, too fast with little time to find viable solutions to unanticipated have been better and more focused PD directed
School Resuming in class time with students. return), completely destroyed any class momentum that was gained upon our return to in-person learning. problems which arose. at implementation and use...
The Yellow (not plus) model began to go very well. The pace Keeping the classroom sanitized, taking class time for mask breaks and helping students with social distancing is time I think it will be challenging to keep up the pace
felt comfortable and the students were focused and consuming and an additonal component to the school day. Moving from Yellow Hybrid to Yellow Hybrid plus is a huge If we are to continue with Hybrid Plus - A four-day Yellow Hybrid Plus Model with of the past one and a half months for an entire
progressing. Students were very happy and excited to be back challenge. Synchronous learning has created a different feeling for classes. Teachers are multitasking and the at-home one day for planning/grading time and training time, home communication, problem- school year. I understand that the best-case
at school. The smaller class sizes allowed students to have group demands attention that takes away from students that are right in front of you. It is more time consuming and increase solving, reflection. The health and energy level of staff should take priority if we are scenario would be returning to the Green model,
more teacher attention and move along more quickly. Mask the planning time needed. For special education, it has had unintended consequences on how schedules are met and how to sustain the return to school. We don't want staff to experience exhaustion, but until that is possible it will be important to
Freeport Middle breaks were able to fit into the class time. The overall vibe in services are provided. Synchronous learning demands more teacher time in communication with students and parents. lowered immune systems and increased absences that will lead to remote learning stabilize our students' experiences and have
School the building made it feel safe and friendly. This takes away from planning time and extends the teacher workday well beyond the school day and what is acceptable. due to lack of substitutes. some routine and normalization.
13

What building do you
spend most of your
time at? What has gone well so far since September? What have been your biggest challenges? What are your ideas for improvement? What are your other comments or concerns?
Freeport Middle Forever changes in chemicals and working O.T. to keep the school sanitized. Also the changes in trying to keep classroom Students are very lacks at the distance
School Outdoor lunches distances. Need help to keep the school safe and not over work what staff is there. requirements as the year goes on
Freeport Middle students are not always practicing social
School students and teachers being flexible schedules less computer instruction and more time for individual teacher/student conference distancing
Social distancing quickly became almost nonexistent with students, particularly in the hallways between classes.
For teachers, there is not enough time to plan for classes, as they are having to prepare two different plans for at-school and
at-home learners at the same time.
The student have, for the most part, really been rolling with the The changes in scheduling have been challenging. Ed techs are scheduled to support certain students in the classroom at
Freeport Middle punches, and teachers have been incredible adaptable as certain times, and also to support students with at-home learning. With the synchronous schedule, some support has had to A planning day every week, like other school systems have, would be very helpful.
School changes are being made to procedure and schedule. go by the wayside to support the students with the most need. Ed techs could support students at home on those planning days. Thank you for asking for staff feedback!
concerned about teacher mental health- so much
Freeport Middle get rid of the student health check- it is super disruptive and does not provide what more added to plate and other districts give more
School Kids have been amazing with all the restrictions all the extra busy work to do simple things is meant to provide time for prep-
Smaller class sizes and a hybrid model. I would not be able to
do the STEM activities I have done if we were in a green model.
I was also able to continue with the 7th grade Marine Science Give teachers a day or 1/2 day of planning time ON THEIR OWN. No meetings-
Day at Winslow Park because of the 2 cohorts. The kids wore including department meetings. My teaching could be much richer if I had time to
masks and there was enough staff available to host a GREAT Not having enough planning time. :-( The delay of school did not reap more planning time for teachers. Instead, our days plan. Years ago, teachers had a day before school started and a day in March that
day of learning. Many kids wish our class sizes were smaller all were filled with meetings, trainings, redesigning our rooms, moving furniture and figuring out the logistics of how we were was independent teacher planning days. As long as we submitted an outline of our Synchronous does not work for every class.
the time (there's a big difference in pace of learning, learning going to open schools. We had some planning time, but not blocks of uninterrupted planning time where we could actually goals for the day, we had the entire day to work in our classrooms. I cannot tell you Please do not push all classes to go
Freeport Middle activities offered and engagement when you have a class of accomplish things. My prep periods are still often consumed by figuring out technology issues or connecting with kids at how energizing and productive that was. Please consider giving us an independent synchronous. And PLEASE....support more
School 12/13 versus 22-24.) home. I am spending double the amount of time planning each day and most of it is happening between 8-11pm at night. teacher planning day this year. planning time for teachers. We are exhausted!
Whole staff came together to set up procedures for a safe
return to school and we are sticking to the procedures. Students Concerned about workload of custodial staff and
are grateful to be back and are wearing masks and helping to not being able to deep clean. Teachers and
keep classrooms clean. We have good technology support from students are doing as much cleaning as we
Freeport Middle Jack Horgan and Bill Ridge, along with staff helping one Not having enough time to prepare quality learning material and troubleshoot technology for synchronous learning. One staff possibly can of desks, chairs, and high touch
School another ..and students helping! Also, cohorts are working well. bathroom out of order. Continue upgrade of technology. Hiring additional custodial staff. areas.
I am concerned that teachers will burn out. We
won't be able to keep up with the demands of it
all - asynchronous, synchronous, grading,
Teaching with a mask on is awful. Communication with students with a mask on while teaching synchronous online classes parent and student communications, tailoring
Freeport Middle is really tough. Trying to figure out how to create and teach an engaging lesson with social distancing, masking, and other lessons to all eventualities, special
School Smaller class sizes, compassion, admin communication constraints is a challenge as well. circumstances, and IEPs.
staffing; planning for synchronous learning; students continuing to maintain physical distancing with and without masks; I don't see this model being sustainable for the
Students started the year taking protocols and procedures additional SpEd paperwork; maintaining student schedules synchronously; supporting students synchronously with the entire school year. Instead of getting into a
Freeport Middle seriously. Our building principal has been great with amount of work expected of them; technological issues for students and staff; the amount of screen time students and staff Giving teachers time to prep, train on new technology and practices and complete groove, it feels like this year is becoming more of
School communication and updates. are expected to have additional duties; limit synchronous classes; hire needed staff a struggle as it goes on.
Freeport Middle
School teachers are very understanding trying to do janitorial work drive van and try to disinfect long hours dont seem like i can get everything done for me less driving and more janitorial work to do better cleaning short staff more help in all departments of rsu 5
1. There isn't enough time to do hybrid or synchronous learning well. There is always something getting sacrificed. We have
all been working nights and weekends just to keep our heads above water. This is the biggest issue.
2. Learning new technology takes a great deal of time to figure out which platforms work best for our needs and then how to
1.Mask wearing and sanitizing have not been an issue for kids. use them effectively.
2.I feel supported by our principal and vice-principal. They treat 3. It is nearly impossible to socially distance from students all day. We need time to plan, connect with kids and parents, and assess student work.
us like the educated professionals that we are. 4. Most of my teaching has turned into a lecture. I know that this isn't the most effective way to teach middle school, but the Providing more planning time during the day or a whole day during the week would
3.The addition of a tech support person at FMS has helped current situation makes it necessary most of the time. It's stressful to know that I'm being broadcast into homes without make this situation do-able. The current workload is not sustainable for the whole
Freeport Middle make the transition to synchronous teaching easier. presenting my best work. year.
School 4.The kids are happy to be here. 5. Tech glitches happen and can derail a whole lesson for remote kids.
My biggest concern is not knowing what is going
to happen come January. Due to health issues, I
can't see coming back to in person learning this
I'm the 7-12 remote math teacher (Alex Briasco-Brin), and I've year, but I can't afford to take a leave of absence
been pleasantly surprised how well remote learning has gone either. I don't understand why every teacher with
so far. a doctor's note shouldn't be allowed to teach
1) As far as pace and depth is concerned, students are lined up remotely. That aside, we owe it to the remote
for at the very least a full year's worth of learning, if not more. students to extend this option the entire year. If
2) It turns out, establishing personal connections and creating a the remote program is ripped from under them
good rapport with students is just as easy as doing it in person. 1) I don't have an answer for the high school absenteeism, it sounds like these kids like a rug, it will cause unnecessary harm to their
3) I'm finding students who would have thrived in school have issues outside of my ability to help. learning and well being . I find it hard to believe
continue to do so now, and better still, a significant number of 1) There are a small number of remote high school students who are not attending class. 2) I also don't have an answer for having a lot of work, there are only 24 hours in a the reasons their families chose the remote
Freeport Middle students and families are reporting this year as being one of if 2) With a teaching load of 6 plus different preps, I'm having to put in an extraordinary amount of time and energy outside of day. As I become more familiar with the Big Ideas Math program, I'm hoping things option will all of a sudden change, just because
School not the best year in math to date. school hours to keep up, including nights and weekends. will ease up a bit. the calendar says it's 2021.
14

What building do you
spend most of your
time at? What has gone well so far since September? What have been your biggest challenges? What are your ideas for improvement? What are your other comments or concerns?
Planning curriculum due to the different approach. I need to take a lot of what I do in person and translate it to online
learning. This takes HOURS!!!
Also, a lot of hands-on learning needs to be transferred into online approaches or dropped. Coordinating kids at home with
kids sitting in school can sometimes be difficult...especially if you are doing hands-on in class and need to plan something for I'm seriously not sure right now. I am straight out and I don't know if I can keep this
kids at home if it isn't possible for them to interact remotely. pace for the entire year. I feel like I am doing everything I can but, as many people
-The kids are wearing masks. will share, I need more time.
- Great support from Ray and tech people. Following up with students who need extra help or support (regular kids without IEPS and plans) is almost impossible. This is
- Teacher communication and sharing of ideas has been my biggest concern right now. Keeping a closer connection with kids. The only thing I can think about is any staff development days we need time for
Freeport Middle amazing. developing curriculum. Teachers don't need their time planned, we need our time
School - Synchronous is working OK. Teaching synchronously and planning is physically exhausting. TO PLAN. As I said, this is a pace that is difficult to keep up.
-Safe social distancing-Impossible in the classroom.
-I cannot help students one on one (proximity)
-Synchronous learning: (lack of technology, shortages/availability,
—kids tuning out because it’s boring watching from home, or not showing up
Smaller classes eliminates virtually ALL behavior issues. —classes In Different places (due to schedule or rate of learning) making synchronous learning almost impossible
Fewer students means relatively instant feedback on work, HW, —it takes away from the students who are right in front of you, whom you see only twice a week for most
progress —Planning for 6-8 classes daily (4 in school and 4 at home)
Cohorts are wonderful—kids are KIND to each other, helpful —Lack of Prep Time with a tremendous increase in creating assignments—often learning the technology as we go and
and are learning hunting down the IT person constantly
Cohorts== no room for bullying, class clowns, drama, etc. it’s a —Very little time for grading Safety is always a concern—more transparency
tight knit ‘Team’ —Meetings and PD instead of time to plan, grade and prepare new lessons w/potential Covid cases would be helpful
Colleagues/Parents have been incredibly supportive of each —PowerSchool and Google Classroom are not aligned-doubling the work Students/Teachers are dehydrated due to
other Drop Synchronous learning as a total solution (use it sparingly) wearing masks and not drinking much
Freeport Middle Classrooms have never been cleaner TOO MUCH SCREEN TIME both Students and Staff Limit PD days for teacher work days (we have TONS to do) Headaches have become just part of the day
School
managing multiple cohorts, creating classroom community, being overwhelmed like its my first year teaching again, having to
learn even more new tech, getting kids engaged to do work at home, being expected to teach 75% of content in 50% of time, giving teachers time to process, all the great professional development is very thanks for so much support, feel like we are eons
Mast Landing School small class sizes, frequent check ins with kids, safety protocols, working 10-12 hour days. helpful but just need time to sit and plan and process and absorb..... ahead of other districts!
• I think it would do wonders for staff to have PD time to deal with the emotional toll
of our situation. Having recent PD about writing/Seesaw/planning for red just added
• Having small numbers has allowed me to provide students to everyone's stress. Also, what a gift it would be (and a boost to morale) to take an
with more support and immediate feedback. occasional staff meeting time to just let us get work done in our classrooms. Too
• Feeling relatively safe due to the protocols in place, as well as many of us are working at night, coming in on the weekends, etc. We, as a staff,
the small class sizes. are absolutely stretched to our limit. Honestly, it's not enough to thank us and tell us I appreciate the thought and time our district's
• Student and staff adherence to safety guidelines has gone • The stress level is certainly higher, yet the teaching and work demands and expectations have not eased up at all. you know how hard we are working. We need *time* and *support* to deal with the leadership has put into every decision,
smoothly. • Keeping up with the constant inundation of paperwork, student check-ins, parent emails, and questions have all been stresses we've literally been feeling since March. (Summer had provided its own particularly from Dr. Foley and the school
• Staff and families have adjusted well, overall, to at-home challenging. level of stress due to the unknowns of the upcoming school year, so that was NOT administration team. Thank you for the
Mast Landing School practice work - both assigning, checking in, and completing. • Morale - for myself and others. This is the first year I've questioned staying in the teaching profession. an opportunity for us to replenish our dwindling energy supply.) opportunity to share how it's going.
I'm concerned for families traveling between
Excitement. Masks and social distancing didn't take the 'fun' out Stay yellow. Going green will significantly impact our distancing and risk our staff Thanksgiving and Christmas; leaving exempt
Mast Landing School of school and learning. Social distancing. It's hard to get 8-11 year olds to maintain distance when they're excited and playful. and students health. states and not informing the school.
I think whichever way we are deciding to do
things, at each level the most important part is
communicating to involved parties. I believe our
administrators have been communicating with
our families beautifully, and we have been
I believe staying in the yellow/hybrid model and just really working into what we've getting CO level communication consistently, but
already started will allow for the safest and optimum learning situation. Working in there are pieces of the puzzle that have not been
the office, a lot of our students that transferred this year did so because of the clear with some transportation issues and as
unpredictability of our models- if we start yellow, then go green, and something things are a bit muddled (policy wise) currently, I
Students unsupervised time in the hallways/transition moments where they are not being monitored to keep 3 feet apart. I happens and everyone goes remote... it seems like as much as people want a am receiving confusion from parents, drivers, etc.
I believe the hybrid model has done wonders in creating a level am wary that if we end up having more students in the building at once, this will become even more challenging to monitor return to normalcy, they also want something consistent. I believe the staff are most and am unable to navigate as effectively as I
Mast Landing School of safety for everyone- students and staff alike. the transition times and cause more opportunities for students to be close in distance. comfortable in this model as well. could have with direct communication.
communication between administration and nutrition when things change in the school. getting kids in and out quickly now Don't know what we will do to improve timely
Mast Landing School Everything in the kitchen has been running pretty smooth that they must choose everything We have already addressed the communication issue. service when we go green.
I would love to have the library open for recess,
While I understand the health reasoning for a five-week specials rotation, at least for at least once a week for each grade to choose
library classes, it would be more valuable to see classes weekly rather than go 5 the library as an indoor recess activity. I would
weeks between content-based classes, especially when we are doing skill-building also like to be able to offer the library page
in learning how to find books independently in the library. As to the health concerns, program for 5th graders during their recess
Small class sizes are wonderful. Students are much more I see every class weekly, so I'm being exposed to every student and teacher every times. These programs offer a valuable
engaged and misbehavior has been minimal compared to Not being able to have students have the freedom they once enjoyed as far as having choices for recess locations and week anyway. I know scheduling is hard, and maybe this is the best method, but I understanding for students that libraries are fun,
previous school years. I believe this can be attributed to the having to scrub some enrichment/extracurricular activities to avoid cross-cohort mixing. I also can physically only fit 12 think it would be better for all specials to be on a weekly rotation, especially since I welcoming community centers which they can
smaller class sizes. We are moving at a faster pace than with students in my room with social distancing. I hope we don't go beyond that number because I don't know how I will fit them in believe students need PE at least once a week and music is also a skill-building enjoy and increases their exposure to and their
Mast Landing School full class sizes. safely. class, it would be better for student academically to have these classes weekly. interest in reading, thus boosting literacy skills.
15

What building do you
spend most of your
time at? What has gone well so far since September? What have been your biggest challenges? What are your ideas for improvement? What are your other comments or concerns?
Yikes. Well, mostly scheduling. As a special educator it has been very difficult to service kids in a way that 1)doesn't take
them out of the classroom too much 2)maintain consistency so that we can get into a routine 3)see kids individually due to I think that overall, RSU5 has done a great job
distancing when we have been seeing kids in groups of 2&3 for years. The schedule changes constantly when kids are in being prepared for hybrid learning. I think that
and out of school. It's hard to get into a groove. this is a challenging and frustrating time for all of
us and I feel like we are doing well under the
Also, I would add that I would like to see district level administration in our buildings more, observing and really seeing both circumstances. I would have liked a "heads up"
I feel like we have plenty of PPE and were well prepared with the GOOD things that we are doing (Shout out to Ben Potvin and Robin O'Connor for their amazing and creative use of before learning about "yellow +" at the school
supplies we needed to have kids in the classrooms, cafeteria outdoor space) and the things that are troublesome that really need to be seen to be understood. Numbers and decisions board meeting. That being said, I understand
and small office spaces safely. I feel like we were very well can look really good on paper, but are not always feasible in "real life." that our administration is under a HUGE amount
protected and well prepared. Anything I asked for in the way of of both pressure and scrutiny and sometimes
PPE (or plexiglass for my desktop, etc) was given without Living outside of the district, I would have made the Oct 9 PD day a "work from home" day. I was literally on ZOOM all day decisions are just made at that upper level
question. The kids have been very good about learning to long, alone in my office. Would have been a huge bonus to be home on my couch but without the commute. Just a thought. without consulting the worker bees.
sanitize hands and spaces and wear masks. I think we were If we are remote anyway, why not give the option to work from home when possible? Just a thought. Thank you for all that you continue to do--I am
Mast Landing School VERY well prepared! District Level administration visiting buildings and classrooms more. (see above) very happy to be a part of RSU5!!!
It has been nice to meet with students in smaller class sizes
Mast Landing School and groups. Scheduling has been very difficult because I work across grade-levels and across schools.
Mast Landing School Everything
To remind ourselves that this crisis/the danger is
not over anytime soon. Let us stay safe,
Mast Landing School Everything. conscious, and patient.
The 15 minute rule for COVID is something that
Notify the staff at the specific school where the case of COVID is, and the class that is strange, I don't think the virus has a concept of
at laugh and learn we rarely interact/see other classes, that has it is in if possible. Many of us interact with so many students on a daily basis, it time. I think if someone was exposed at all they
Mast Landing School gone well with COVID. feeling in the dark about covid makes it difficult to know if we have been exposed. should be notified.
Mast Landing School getting to know the different days communication
That we are not having trainings on the new
plans/platforms for connecting with parents
when/if we end up remote again. What
scheduling and shifting to 5 day supports and finding the time to do all the necessary planning and connecting with synchronous teaching and learning will look like
Mast Landing School staff are all working hard together classroom teachers for special education students?
Keeping a 6 foot distance. Students and teachers have been given measured out spaces but "extra" staff do not. I Still concerned that I will bring this home to my
Mast Landing School Hybrid model consistently spend time closer than 6' due to space and job limitations, especially now that we're "hybrid plus". family with dire consequences...
Very difficult to manage the every other Friday schedule for students. There is little “rhythm” that can be established because
of this. Students coming two days/week and using Weds as either a synchronous time for all students or for teacher
Mast Landing School Keeping children safe. planning/strategy group work may be a more effective model. See above question Thank you!
Having a smaller cohort of students has allowed us to form
bonds with students much quicker than in the past. Students I am concerned we will try to fit more students
feel more comfortable in the smaller groups so they share and into spaces that will not allow for the
participate in class more freely. Smaller groups also allow me to recommended social distancing. I also do not
cover material and check for understanding quicker. We have enough individual equipment for groups
Mast Landing School accomplish more than usual in each lesson. Students not being able to share equipment. Keeping students socially distanced but having them work cooperatively. Continue the way we are currently doing things. larger than 12.
I love seeing students in person. They have been doing a
fantastic job of wearing masks and hand sanitizing. At first, they I am concerned that classroom teachers do not
were having trouble with social distancing, but they are starting As a specialist, I have had to prioritize lessons since I won't be able to get through everything this year. That is hard! It's have enough time to prepare. They seem
to get the hang of it! The small class sizes are amazing and I challenging to see a class for a week, and then not again for another 5 weeks, but I understand the reasoning behind it. swamped and I unfortunately don't have any
feel we have been able to make connections with students even Another challenge is how the roster changes so often as kids move in and out of remote pathway, or more recently having I think we need to continue to keep our students' emotional well being in mind with ideas for a solution. Just wanted to point that out!
Mast Landing School though we only see them part of the week. some students start attending school 5 days a week. Our mantra this year has been all about flexibility! any changes we make. Thanks for asking for our input.
Lastly, I want to thank all the Board of Directors,
Time. We are all getting acclimated with this new model of teaching - learning new strategies on how to teach in class and Administrators, Superintendent, etc. for all the
support students/families who are doing at home practice work. We are having to collaborate with colleagues on a daily hard work that went into making the hybrid plan
basis to make sure consistent messages and work expectations are being shared with students and families across grade for returning to school this year. You have put
levels. We are emailing and communicating with families more. We are organizing and planning for A and B days and then students first, been concerned about families and
having to figure out the extra Friday and how that day will fit into the educational plan. For instance, if there is an ABABA have made many informed decisions regarding
week and then an ABABB week you cannot stay on schedule for teaching the same material to both cohorts - this just adds reentry. At all of my Parent/Teacher conferences
to the conundrum of how do you stay on a "curriculum calendar" schedule. Now add in the 5 day a week students who are I expressed gratitude for the way the RSU has
We've been able to be with the students and form relationships not always students who can do independent work consistently. In addition, all the at home practice work that the students handled this very difficult pandemic situation with
with them and their families. Being in the yellow model has have done needs to be checked and returned (they spent the time to do it - it's only right to collect it and check it.) It's just all students and families. It's now time to allow your
allowed teachers the ability to teach face to face and this is a juggling act and we need more time to do it well. Our PD time has been filled with new learning - tc work, writing, math, educators to do the work they need to do within
definitely the best type of teaching/learning. The RSU has done getting prepared for the red plan - we need time to do the yellow plan successfully. We also need to make sure students are their classrooms and discontinue the new
a fabulous job allowing students to be educated as much as safe in our classrooms by sanitizing often, reminding students to sanitize and distance - these reminders come numerous Make PLC times more open and not so structured. PD days should be more open learning practices for this school year - we are
possible in the yellow model. Just recently we have asked times every single day! SOLUTION: The way to help this situation is by treating educators as professionals and give them ended so time can be spent in our classrooms and with grade level teachers learning every single day in this pandemic and
additional students who were not finding success with the at the PLC times on Wednesdays (3:35-5:05) to do work in their classrooms - to catch up with all the paperwork, emails, focusing on how to make the Yellow Model more successful. This is not a year for know the responsibility we have is not only to
home practice day to come to school 5 days a week. All in all planning, room organizing, correcting, creating google classrooms, creating new assignments in platforms like Freckle and new curriculum learning - it's a year to make sure what we are doing is working and educate our community of learners, but also to
the decision has proven to be successful for students and Seesaw, to meet with parents/students/colleagues. It would be nice if all our PLC & PD time didn't have an agenda and we making sure students and families are supported emotionally as well as take care of them emotionally and to keep them
Mast Landing School families. were given some professional freedom on how to best to utilize that time. academically. Educators need that support as well. healthy in our care.
16

What building do you
spend most of your
time at? What has gone well so far since September? What have been your biggest challenges? What are your ideas for improvement? What are your other comments or concerns?
Help take some of the pressure off classroom teachers - less meetings, more
support. I see a lot of frantic teachers trying to do their best. I don't think frantic
teachers are necessarily effective teachers.
I think that we need to take a systemic look at supporting some students - making it
acceptable to give them ample time to catch up on learning they may have missed -
Having students back in the classroom - I feel like I am really an extra year? more mixed grade classrooms next year? something to help students
teaching again. The smaller size of the cohorts has allowed me Trying to balance the expectations and educational rigor with both the student's emotional needs and their current academic who have struggled or are struggling to move forward due to the adaptations that
Mast Landing School to really dig in and help some students who have fallen behind. levels. I have to go back before I can go forward but I keep feeling this pressure to move students at an accelerated rate. have been made during COVID.
The constant changes and not knowing what to expect from day to day. It is hard to gain traction or get momentum with so
many different changes constantly happening. There have been several times this year where I have received mixed I appreciate all of the effort, hard work and
messages. It is difficult to move forward when no one seems to know the answers. dedication provided by the RSU5 staff and
community to get the 2020-21 school year
One of the other biggest challenges is the academic push that is being placed on teachers. We need to focus on student's started! This is a scary, unsettling, difficult and
The fact that we can be IN SCHOOL face to face with students health, social/emotional well being and building strong relationships and connections before we can expect any academic different time. We need to help support each
is AMAZING! growth to occur. I feel, there is this underlying sense of urgency to PUSH STUDENTS to higher levels while PUSHING other, remain optimistic and recognize that this is
Although there are still experiences throughout my day where I TEACHERS to their breaking points. FRANTIC, STRESSED OUT, EXHAUSTED TEACHERS ARE NOT GOING TO HELP EXTREMELY CHALLENGING for all of us.
feel unsafe, I would say the transition back into the building with LIFT ACADEMIC LEARNING FOR ANYONE. Let's chill out and focus on what's REALLY important; the mental, emotional Recognize that the demands are currently set too high and focus on what's REALLY Remember to Stay Well, Stay Safe and Stay
Mast Landing School students has gone well overall. and physical health of our community. IMPORTANT! See previous question for more details. KIND!
I appreciate that the district and MLS administration has been
very organized and communicated well with regards to the
many covid-related adjustments this year. As a specialist,
working with smaller cohorts has made following covid safety
protocols much easier/possible, while also providing high quality
programming. I feel safer working with smaller groups of
students and using the cohort model over a 5-week rotation. As I mentioned above, specialists see their students for 2-days in a week, every 5 weeks. Therefore, I'm condensing my
projects and lessons into this 2-day timeframe. It's challenging to squeeze in everything I want to cover!
These smaller groups have also been a pleasure to teach
because I can build stronger relationships with each student. My class rosters are often changing, which requires frequent reorganization of seating charts, lesson catch-ups, etc. This Bit of a selfish but honest concern---- I wish there
Seeing students multiple times a week helps with this too. takes time. were a way to safely celebrate the holidays with
Curriculum-wise, the hybrid system necessitates shortening my my out-of-state family and safely return to work.
units, but the carry-over of knowledge and skills from one class I see the advantages outweighing the disadvantages, but it is challenging to have some students attending 5 days. For example, a pre-planned week of remote
to the next during each week's rotation is strong. I wish I had a great idea to write here! It's my experience that things are going well, learning for all in early January might allow
Planning remote lessons in addition to in-person lessons has gone fine, but does take time. all things considered, and I suggest maintaining the systems we have in place. I travel, a negative test, and safely returning to
Students and staff are doing a great job wearing masks. I sense appreciate that the board decided to keep MLS in the hybrid model, with work. I don't expect this to be the model we
students really enjoy being part of a smaller class. Camaraderie Since we are given time to do it, cleaning supplies between groups is not my biggest challenge, but the time to do it is accommodations for some 5-day students and the potential for off-site programming adopt, but I mention it as a concern I imagine lots
Mast Landing School is noticeably high amongst students. essential and very helpful! on at-home days. I love the suggestion to offer such programming at Wolfe's Neck. of people have.
If we go to green getting the kids through the line
Mast Landing School Having the school in the yellow with half the kids. Trying to serve everything in a timely manner. with time for them to eat.
I would like to not feel like I am being labeled as
"too nervous" if I speak out when I see staff not
adhering to CDC guidelines. It doesn't feel good
as an employee when the CDC says the best
things you can do to stay health is social
distancing, face coverings and hand washing, yet
administration says that we shouldn't even
expect social distancing in schools. A lot of us
have no choice but to come to work and are
making huge sacrifices in order to be here. I
have many high risk people in my family,
including my spouse. I also am not able to see
other close family members because we can't
take the risk now that I have possible daily
exposure. I understand that we are here for the
students, but it would be nice to feel that when
decisions are made teachers needs would also
Social distancing and watching how little everyone even tries to social distance. Ed techs are reminded frequently to wear be considered.
goggles or shield, but most do not. I don't feel like it is worth saying anything because I don't feel that that will change the It is very stressful to see the numbers in the state
behavior. I am also very uncomfortable with building level meetings that are in person when a zoom meeting would going up, yet we continually talk about adding
Seeing how staff has risen to the challenge and is adapting to accomplish the same thing. All of our special ed meetings are on the computer, I don't see why we don't do others such as more students to buildings.
Mast Landing School all of the changes in how we educate students. RTI via zoom. Consistently adhering to CDC guidelines.
New pick up and drop off. New cohort schedules running much
more smoothly than expected. Kids wearing masks! Staff I think we have a really hard working district that
Morse Street School working together to be flexible. Finding Subs. Needing more people for duties. Exhaustion , emotions and stress levels of staff are high. Find more subs! put the needs of kids first!
Teachers need more time to get done what they need to get done. Fortunately,
Getting to know my students in person, watching them play at Keeping students physically distanced, keeping up with evening communication sheets for families, keeping up with we've been gifted staff mtg. time for grade level business, but it is just not enough. Thank you for checking in with us. Please keep
Morse Street School recess. conferring with my students from 6ft. away, connecting with students daily behind masks. Time, time, time. doing this!
17

What building do you
spend most of your
time at? What has gone well so far since September? What have been your biggest challenges? What are your ideas for improvement? What are your other comments or concerns?
The students and staff seem to have adjusted quickly to the Space; whether moving around a classroom or outside on the playground. It is a challenge keeping children apart. Also, To continue to give verbal and visual reminders on keeping 3 or 6 feet apart. No If space is a problem now, how will we be able to
Morse Street School "new norm". Mask wearing isn't an issue for the students. keeping the room warm in colder months with windows open. idea on keeping the rooms warm other than dressing for the cold. go green with the distance recommendations.
This tool stresses the staff and many parents.
Students are pulled from valuable time in
classroom to do this "checklist" once they
already have been in school and potentially
exposing others. Loss of class time, ineffective
Asking families to take the "RSU5 Promise" for COVID safety. Which would be use of tool, staff are spending too much time to
frequent reminders and education around this promise (a promise not to send complete and follow up on this student checklist.
students to school with fevers, having traveled to restricted area, not sending with To fight against covid we need education and
Managing the daily covid screener. Too much time and attention goes to this tool that has not been shown to be effective in any COVID like sickness AND calling the school if unsure or have have questions) awareness not time wasted time on checklists
Morse Street School Hybrid model, less students in the building reducing COVID cases. instead of daily computerized checklist. not proven to help.
The mental health of your teachers and staff is
dangerous. We cannot sustain this. There are
many people who have sacrificed a lot in our
personal lives to be here. For example, my
children haven't seen their grandparents for over
two months because my exposure is so high.
Teachers are reporting headaches multiple times
Keeping up with cleaning/sanitizing per week and exhaustion beyond anything we
Ventilation- I do not have a heater that moves air in my room so the students have been freezing on the cooler days have ever experienced.
Completing my job duties within CDC guidelines (I am an OT)
Lack of communication with families regarding the fact that we have never been truly hybrid- parents are putting trust in us to I am concerned how cold it will be in the coming
keep their children safe but we have many students who are crossing cohorts and classrooms. This is now increasing and I weeks since a fan balancing on a window that
don't think parents understand what that looks like. More communication with parents. opens from the top into the room (so who is to
More time for cleaning. say it is even moving air?) , is my only hope of
Morse Street School Building relationships with students Put safety FIRST over pushing students to be in the building as much as possible. ventilation.
My outdoor teaching space.I am outside as much as possible
Morse Street School which makes me feel comfortable. Keeping the students 3 feet apart and keeping my distance of 6 feet which is impossible. None-I think what we have going is working. I would not change it.
I think we need to be realistic about PD time this year. While book studies and new
learning have their place, I think right now from what I've heard from my co-workers, As the weather gets colder and more kids are
they're in survival mode. I'm sending in video lessons for my classes that I create, returning to school I'm concerned about social
1) Crafting a quality curriculum with students sharing materials for STEM classes. I've pretty much thrown out what I usually and like I mentioned earlier, this itself is taxing. I have to come up with all new distancing, mask breaks, snack time, etc. All
do and am crafting assignments that are all using inexpensive, consumable materials like paper. This can only last so long, lessons so students aren't sharing materials. That is non-stop PD and it's those things get more difficult as we can't take
though and I definitely have concerns about how to rotate materials so that kids in one cohort aren't touching materials kids exhausting. I noticed that recently some mental health activities and time to do what classes outside as easily. I recall that a final test
in another cohort are using in the same day. you need to do was built into the PD time and I think that's essential this year. There of the air quality was going to be done later in fall
I'm in a unique situation because I've been home on leave since 2) Also, I'm concerned as more kids return to PES that the square footage in my room - which I'm sharing with another is so much individualized new learning taking place on teachers' personal time I at MSS. I'm also concerned about what the
9/8 using the CARES Act Extension of the FLMA because I teacher who has a corner set up for RTI - will not accommodate whole classes unless I rearrange the room once again, this think you need to respect that and take it into consideration. Many teachers I results of that may be and how it will affect us
have elementary-age kids who only have school two days a time with desks shoved up against all the perimeter walls. This doesn't allow kids to be able to see the projector screen or communicate with online have said this year - whether it's their 5th or 25th year once the windows are closed all winter. When flu
week. However, I appreciated the 7 days of PD we were given interact wit