h other students during the class, though. teaching - is as challenging as their first year teaching when you feel like you're season hits, I'm concerned that the symptoms
to allow us to practice routines and adapt our practices for the 3) At MSS I'm using 5-foot tables with 2-3 kids at each table. When there are 3 kids at a table, if kids are sitting back in their learning everything for the first time and changing plans non-stop to figure out what closely mimic COVID, so there will be a lot of
Morse Street School new guidelines. chairs they are 3 feet apart, but if they're leaning over the table doing work, they aren't. works best. Burn-out is real. quarantining of both staff and students.
I've been very happy with our district has
Less students in the building at one time makes it less busy in handled everything, both as a parent and as a
Morse Street School the office. Parent drop-off/pick-up is very smooth. The technology challenges with the Frontline app and parents forgetting to fill it out staff member.
I am so grateful for our custodial staff but one
thing that worries me is that our trash cans do
The support from our administrator, Julie, has been above and not get emptied every night and with the concern
beyond. Any challenges that are arising are being addressed of germs, I would like to see this emptied every
Morse Street School quickly. Working in special education, the biggest challenge has been finding ways to increase distance when appropriate. None at this time. day.
Having our most struggling learners come to
Work on maintaining social distancing between the kids themselves and the kids school 5 days a week when possible is a
Morse Street School The kids are doing a great job wearing their masks. Staying 3 to 6 feet away from the kids. and adults. positive.
Schedule on 5 week rotation in two schools makes it hard to connect with any consistency. I agree with and understand why Few too many every day students who are repeating lessons that others are getting Just staying positive and safe. Maybe taking a bit
Morse Street School Managing space with class size this is important. for the first time. It would be easier to keep track of if we went to green. more off each others plates.
The distancing. Keeping 6ft of space between myself and my students has not been easy, or possible, to be honest. I can't
hear them with the heater and fan running, and to be able to instruct them in meaningful ways I am needing to be close to
them. There's just no way around it. To provide the instruction students need and to do what teachers are required to do is
extremely challenging from a distance. It makes each day very hard.
Having smaller class sizes and being able to spend more time More staff meetings being set aside for time in classrooms or time with teams. One big concern is the CDC guidelines not being
teaching in small groups with students. Now that some kids are Secondly, it has also been challenging and exhausting creating activities and work for students to do on their at-home days. followed (because they can't be in reality) and
attending 5 days/week, it has been beneficial for those students To prep for my days at school, but also prep for things for students to complete at home (differentiated things, too) has been Professional development that is meaningful and well-planned to be responsive to the push for more and more students to be in
Morse Street School to have repeated lessons and consistent learning. double the workload. I feel like I can never get ahead with things. The lack of time we're given for prep is not enough. the times we're in. classrooms.
18

What building do you
spend most of your
time at? What has gone well so far since September? What have been your biggest challenges? What are your ideas for improvement? What are your other comments or concerns?
I realize this isn’t going to happen, but many
other competitive districts have a ‘remote’ day for
all students. This allows teachers to have PLC
time, plan for hybrid days, as well as meet with
small groups of children remotely without masks.
There is so much of our learning that is tricky
because of masks (letter sounds, social
emotional work, etc.) Having one day to work
with students virtually would allow this instruction
to happen as well as prepare for any remote
learning we may need to do later. I so wish our
teachers had this opportunity to breathe, plan,
and work with students.
Ventilation - our building is old and many of us
are not confident in the ventilation system
reports. Right now we’ve been told to keep
windows open at all times, but with the cooler
weather, it’s already becoming challenging. WIth
frigid temps around the corner, how will we keep
safe inside with windows closed? Most people
won’t go sit inside restaurants or movie theaters
for an hour or two, yet we’re going to be in a
small, enclosed room, with no fresh air for 7
hours a day.
Keeping our hybrid model with low numbers. It’s the only way to attempt to follow Conferences have been another layer of
the guidelines. exhaustion. As a teacher I KNOW the
Mental health - for both students and staff. Everyone is exhausted. Both students importance of them and I don’t want to change
and staff need mental health work. This year, the focus of our PD should be student that! BUT, I know many schools will do an early
and staff mental health, not literacy and/or math. release or something similar to help teachers fit
PD should be able to done virtually from home (many other districts, like Yarmouth them all in. Asking us to plan, prep, and teach
are doing this.) When we come together as a whole staff (staff meetings or PD our normal load plus conferences before and
days) it is very hard to keep six feet distance between adults and we aren’t doing it after school (often into the evening) feels extra
well. exhausting on top of everything else this year.
Distancing guidelines are very challenging. With ten students I feel like it’s OK, but the thought of adding more is scary. Before school started, we were told it would be ‘all hands on deck’ - everyone would The National Institute of Health states that when
Children move. A lot. Keeping them 3-6 feet apart all day is not easy while also trying to deliver high quality instruction. be pitching in. The first week of school felt this way, but it doesn’t feel that way now. indoors we should be 6 feet apart. Was 3 feet
Kids are happy to be back The toll of monitoring distancing, masks, hygiene all day, on top of teaching is exhausting If you’re not in a classroom with students, what can you do to help those who are created to get us back to school? Couple this
Smaller groups are helping with meeting guidelines Meetings are tricky. We are having our PLCs before school because there is no time during the day. Staff meetings are a out? Duties, mask breaks, etc. Teachers shouldn’t have to ask, it should simply be with the lack of ventilation, especially as we head
Morse Street School Masks and hand hygiene are going well mix of virtual and in person and it’s hard after wearing a mask for 7-8 hours to keep it one another hour. provided. into winter, and it is extra scary.
- Move the focus during this time from PD and coaching to safety and health. So
much of our limited time this year has been spent in meetings and workshops, fine-
tuning ourselves as educators, which is great in a normal year, but we do not have
the bandwidth for it this year. Let it go so that we can take a breath, focus on
keeping ourselves and our students physically and mentally safe, have
conversations about what educators actually need right now, in this extraordinary
situation. We are pretending it is business as usual this year, but it is not. We need
check-ins about our mental health, offers for extra time to prep (or sleep so we don’t
get sick during flu season!), offers of free/reduced-cost therapy, etc.
- Distancing isn't happening with consistency. The only time when the required distances (3' between students, 6' from me)
are happening is during lessons, when students are on their rug spots and I am teaching from my teaching station. - If a classroom gets a case, be honest with the CDC about who has had contact
Otherwise, I have to get ~1-2 feet away from kids to confer or do small groups, which is where the vast majority of the school (both cohorts because there are multiple students coming to one classroom every
day is spent. And during any kind of movement, transitions, kids getting up as they work to look at anchor charts or ask me day, the entire grade level on the playground and bathroom) and the fact that
questions or go to the bathroom etc - they are often getting much closer to each other than 3'. I try my best to keep distance distancing is not happening. If one student at a grade level gets Covid, the entire
between myself and everyone, but it hasn’t been possible given the space, number of students, and requirements that we grade is at risk - they all share one bathroom, breathe heavily right next to each
confer and do small groups in person. other on the playground, share playground equipment. Those things needs to be
made clear to the CDC should any contact tracing need to happen.
- I am exhausted all the time, and I see that my colleagues are too. We are overworked in a normal year, and we accept that
as part of this amazing job, but this year is vastly more work and stress. There is so much more to worry about this year, and - Enforce the distancing requirements. Do not require teachers to confer or do small
the stakes are so much higher - we are acting as both teachers and health care workers in a way, constantly on alert to groups the way they’ve always been done. They could be done on iPads from
protect students' health. It’s not healthy or sustainable for us. across the room. Weird and not ideal, but the 1-2’ distance when it’s supposed to be I am wondering if work on MSS’s air exchange
6’ is not safe. And make the requirements consistent and consistently followed system was ever tested or done? I think it was
- Contributing to the exhaustion is extreme anxiety, and a feeling that the district may not care about its educators’ physical across the entire district. Or if you can’t enforce them, tell families straightforwardly supposed to happen this fall, technically should
or mental health or well-being. This survey might be a step in the right direction, and though I’m skeptical since nothing that distancing is not happening in school. have happened before school started - is it going
seemed to come of the survey before school began, I hope it will start to lead toward the empathy and support we need. to happen? Families need to know the status of
- Require that families send students to school with warm clothing for outdoor the system so they can make educated decisions
Building relationships with students, which has been great - Outdoor learning isn’t happening because, despite many reminders, not every family is sending students to school with the learning. If they show up without it, have their family bring it, or have the school about keeping their children inside the school
Morse Street School because of the small cohort sizes. necessary clothing. It is getting colder, and keeping classroom windows open is already providing a challenge. provide it. building when windows start closing in winter.
19

What building do you
spend most of your
time at? What has gone well so far since September? What have been your biggest challenges? What are your ideas for improvement? What are your other comments or concerns?
It's honestly hard to put into words the exhaustion I've been feeling. I feel like I have to either sacrifice my safety, or the
quality of my teaching to do this job right now. It seems like we're still expected to teach "as normal," but with the CDC
guidelines in place. Trying to monitor that the kids are following the guidelines while also teaching is exhausting. I'm
constantly reminding kids to put their masks all the way up, or asking kids to wash their hands if I see them go under their
mask to pick their noses. These things are totally normal for kindergarten, but it's stressful to think that I'm putting the safety
of the class at risk if I'm not vigilant about monitoring that on top of trying to teach.
The reality is that 5 year olds cannot distance, and while they've done great with the masks there are still many times when
they are not worn properly. I would say that I am rarely able to stay 6 feet away from my students, and my students have a
very hard time staying even 3 feet from one another. I've noticed that as the day progresses and my students get tired, their
ability to distance diminishes further. It takes a lot of energy for them to monitor that too, and by the end of the day most can't
do it.
I feel like outdoor learning was offered as a possible solution to the safety issues, but it's incredibly challenging to take 5 year
olds outside and still do a "regular" reading or writing workshop. I think knowing that there's this pressure to keep the
curriculum moving because the students aren't here every day deters a lot of teachers from actually doing outdoor learning.
Going outside to have a mask break also only works if the students can actually stay 6 feet apart. I've taken my students out
for a math lesson and told them they all had to stay in their spot if they wanted their masks off, but the quality of the lesson
seemed compromised since it was hard for the kids to collaborate and talk to one another that way. We also know that it's
only getting colder, and we won't be able to teach outside much longer (or have snack outside--which is really the only way I
feel safe at snack time).
Preparing for the "at home" days has been a challenge as well. I usually spend my entire planning block trying to get the
materials ready for their at home day, so I never feel like I get to use that time to actually look ahead at the curriculum. The
extra prep that it takes to get the materials ready and in students' folders is a lot. I think families were told at the beginning of
the year that they would get individualized goals and assignments for their students on the at home days as teachers start to
learn each students' needs, but the reality is we have no time to prep that and actually make it happen.
I really do worry about staff mental health--I see my team members struggling and it's hard to keep moral up when you just
don't feel physically safe. My team's schedules don't line up to have PLC time during the day, and our principal has been
great about giving us time during staff meetings to meet with PLCs, but it doesn't feel like enough. I feel like now more than
ever we need our teams for support and to help us navigate the year, and that time feels scarce.
I think the adults, just like the kids, are craving some sort of routine. And while I understand that things will inevitably have to
Having smaller groups through the hybrid model has been nice. change throughout the year, adding students to our classrooms has added another layer of feeling overwhelmed. Just when I I think anything we can do to take care of the mental health of our staff is so
I do feel like I'm starting to get to know the kids better, and felt like I was getting into a routine with my cohorts I was having students added, and had to rethink my room setup to make important--it impacts how well we can in turn support our students. It would also be
actually give each student more focused attention during sure I could still keep my kids at a safe distance (and adding that on top of conference week was a huge stressor). Please great to have more time with our PLCs to regroup and look ahead to the coming Thank you for sending out a survey to staff. We
workshops when they are in school because I have fewer kids know that we're really trying to be flexible and adapt, but constantly having to change your room and add more students is months. We got curriculum pacing guides from coaches for the first couple of really appreciate you taking the time to seek and
Morse Street School at a time. exhausting, and is preventing us from being able to try to settle into this year. months which was really helpful, but we've almost reached the end of those. listen to our feedback.
Julie Nickerson has been our rock. She has continually asked
people about their questions and concerns. If she can’t answer
questions, she finds the answers to the questions. Since we
started planning this summer, Julie has kept everyone in the
loop. She invited all staff to join in planning sessions. People
came into school to help with planning & we had zoom
meetings on planning. She is constantly updating us on revised
routines. In this year of unknowns, everything she has done has
been to make this the safest and best possible learning
experience for students, families and staff. Julie makes me feel
safe and supported. In September, I had a zoom open house
and a curriculum night. I just finished fall conferences. Every
family came to their conference. Everyone was very supportive. It’s a new level of work planning assignments, rethinking the physical set up of our
The families were very pleased with how the hybrid is working. classroom spaces, reworking assignments so kids have individual sets of materials,
They are pleased with the home day work and are happy that it helping kids with masks, distancing, hand washing and sanitizing, planning home
is not tech heavy work. I have a family who decided to do the day work, cleaning, sanitizing and teaching. It would be great if we could put “new
online option at the last minute. They came to the meet & greet learning” for staff on hold. I would like to see staff meetings and PLDs dedicated to
and I was able to meet their child. They asked if I would still giving teachers time to plan for what’s happening right now. Let teachers meet to
include them in my communications with families. The parents rework assignments for the hybrid model. Let teachers have this time for their own
have sent me emails thanking me for including them in my individual planning. Let teachers work on tech issues. Give us time to really know
updates. I feel like their child has been a part of my class and how to use the iPads and teach our young friends how to use them. Give us time to
will transition well when s/he joins our class for in school work with our grade level team to be sure we are ready to go red at a moment’s
learning. In this year of uncertainty, I have felt supported by Keeping the 6 foot distance from kids. It is difficult and unnatural. I am often closer than six feet. I can’t hear the kids through notice. These are unprecedented times. Every teacher from first year to seasoned
Julie, families, administration and the school board. I have tried their masks. We practice talking louder. That’s a skill they are still practicing. It makes me so sad to constantly ask them to professionals is working harder and very differently than we have ever done in our Thank you for doing this survey. Thanks for
to take things week by week and not look too far ahead so I repeat what they are saying. If a child has a speech issue that adds to the difficulty of understanding them. Now, that there career. Please acknowledge that we can’t continue to do it all at this pace. Please asking for our input. Please survey us every five
don’t add stress and have to redo plans because of sudden are some kids coming five days, it’s added a new level of planning and implementation. I’m planning and teaching for give us the gift of time during staff meetings and PLDs to do our planning. Please or six weeks.
changes. everyone who is doing in person learning and I’m making sure the 2/3 day learners are getting quality work for their home trust that we will use this time wisely and in the best ways that will benefit our Things are constantly changing and I would
Morse Street School days. It’s a lot to juggle. students. appreciate being able to keep you up to date.
20

What building do you
spend most of your
time at? What has gone well so far since September? What have been your biggest challenges? What are your ideas for improvement? What are your other comments or concerns?
It is disheartening to not know as a parent that
more and more kids are being added to classes
that it was thought to have an appropriate
amount to maintain distancing, and to know as a
teacher that is happening. I do not want my
children in classes where more and more
children are packed in, in unsafe ways. It feels
like adding more doesn’t show that we value
people’s opinions regarding taking COVID
seriously. It has been communicated to families
that we are trying to get more children in, but not
that we are adding so many that classrooms now
are even more unable to meet guidelines.
Parents do not know how many kids are in their
child's room. It goes back to “on paper” it looks
good but in real life it doesn’t work. We need to
assure that we are meeting guidelines, which
most times we are not.
Ventilation- What will winter look like when we
need windows open for proper ventilation, yet
rooms are freezing? I know many are not
comfortable being in the room with windows
closed (myself included)and we have assured
parents that we are keeping their children safe.
As a parent, I do NOT want my child in a room
with windows closed, but how can they stay open
if it is freezing? We don't go to movies or
restaurants for ventilation reasons, yet are in
rooms that are not super safe. Outdoor learning
will be VERY difficult in the winter once winter
gear is needed. The dressing/undressing,
managing materials, etc requires a great deal of
time which cuts into instruction. At times we can’
t have both rigor and outdoor learning,
something must give. Also-I think air quality tests
were to be done once weather became cooler, is
this going to happen?
I wonder why other school districts are more
aggressive in their quarantine/shut down
procedures, while we take a moderate approach.
This seems scary, and that it allows more spread
of the virus.
If there is funding why are we not purchasing
quality air filters for each classroom?
Where does the 3 feet guideline come from?
The National Institute of Health states that when
indoors we should be 6 feet apart. Was 3 feet
created to get us back to school? Couple this
Maintaining distancing- It is very challenging to keep children 3 ft and 6 ft apart. On paper, it seems as if it is much easier with the lack of ventilation and it is extra scary.
than it really is in person. Children move, and therefore constantly monitoring for proper distancing is a challenge. I have 10
students and I feel as if I'm truly maxed out. The thought of adding more bodies into my room is another worry. It is almost I truly value and treasure RSU 5. I know this is a
impossible to ensure distancing now, let alone when more bodies are added. It also feels unsafe and questionable at best to hard time for everyone, and that decisions are
add bodies at this stage in the pandemic. We are still in a pandemic. being made to try and support all in the best
possible ways. I do wish teacher's were able to
Mask wearing- Children are doing a nice job wearing masks but at times it's a challenge for them to be worn properly. Noses voice their opinions in a more open way, and that
are often showing, so it's just a very frequent reminder of "masks up friends". The cafeteria is a place where masks are not we were heard. Not one teacher I know wants to
worn and to be frank children are not 6 feet apart. It goes back to people being moving objects. The benches themselves are not work- or not do what is best for children. We
6 feet, add a body and that is not 6 feet. We need to value teacher opinions. Teachers are the ones who work directly with just want it done in the most safe way possible,
students, and who know what works and doesn’t work the best. We should rethink and I think most feel that we are very unsafe in
Emotional Well-Being- There are so many things on teacher's plates, now more than ever. The rigor of curriculums, the our work around professional development. our current situation. I sometimes wonder if
planning for at-home days, the constant checking for distancing and safety, the worry for the health of students, staff, opinions of those who are not in the classroom
families, and self, the endless meetings. Not to mention the worry of the plan changing at any time. All of this makes this job We have great needs in the area of social-emotional health, and that should be are the ones heard more loudly. But- we have to
It has been wise to have smaller groups so that we can build a challenging one. I believe the district will lose quality educators. We are not spending time thinking about how to support looked at. Our professional development should be focused on taking care of our really listen to those who are in the classroom.
relationships with the children, especially since we are social emotional well being of students or teachers, but I feel this should be a priority. At times it has felt as if teacher staff/children. Our PD should take place virtually to allow adults to be without masks. We also have to keep in mind that "normal" isn't
supposed to be farther removed (physically) than we are used feedback wasn’t important or considered, though we are the ones who do the job. This stress has taken a toll on folks and I what is best right now. We are in a situation that
to. Smaller groups makes attempting distancing more fear burnout for lots of staff. New teachers are overwhelmed and overworked, as well as veteran teachers who are trying so We need to place more value on doing the yellow plan better, rather than push for is inconvenient for ALL but need to do what is
manageable. Teachers and students are happy to be back in hard to keep up yet are finding it hard to do so. I know many people (myself included) are just not sleeping at night. In a green. I do recognize that maybe other grades with older students MAY be more safe for everyone.
person and great relationships with students and families have normal year the pressure can be intense but now in addition to the pressures of rigor, managing lives, conferences, etc. we able to meet guidelines, but kindergarten classrooms just can't operate in safe ways
been made. There is a strong camaraderie among classroom are worrying about mental and physical health. In 29 days of school we have already had to send staff home due to their with a high number of children. Our jobs require us to be close, for long periods of Thank you for taking the time to put together this
teachers, and we truly have empathy for one another and are mental well-being. This is all taking a toll on teachers and students! time. Short of teaching students at desks, where they are unable to move, and the survey and to ask how things are going.
Morse Street School offering tremendous support. teacher staying far away, we need to keep our numbers low.
21

What building do you
spend most of your
time at? What has gone well so far since September? What have been your biggest challenges? What are your ideas for improvement? What are your other comments or concerns?
*Teachers need more time (not our personal time) to be able to maintain the rigor of
quality instruction and educational experiences that RSU5 is known for. We cannot
continue to provide this level of in person instruction and quality home learning
opportunities for the duration of the school year without giving teachers TIME to
prepare this work. I 100% appreciate the Professional Development afforded to our
district, but in the midst of a pandemic, I feel that priority needs to be given to
providing teachers with TIME. Burnout in a typical year is a huge factor for
educators as we are always spinning more and more plates in the air. This year the
plates have multiplied, they're on fire and we are expected to juggle them all the
same. While some teachers may APPEAR to be doing this with grace, many of us
are putting 100% into this work and not feeling that it is enough. We have to
consider this as a district and find ways to support teachers with immediate relief for
the problems here and now before we can be expected to take on new learning
through PD as we are all essentially learning Pandemic Teaching 101 this year and
little of our training or experiences have offered this course in the past!!
*Teachers need TIME to prepare for RED Learning so that we are not left
*Workload is exhausting. Teaching two groups of students while also preparing, and explaining plans for home learning days scrambling as we were in March to prepare for this work. Providing teachers with
*The students love being in school. I have heard "I love school" takes a lot of time. the time to prepare an "emergency launch" plan for this shift will go a long way THANK YOU to the board for continuing to
more times already this year than I have in the past. *Maintaining Social Distancing is a challenge. Period. There really isn't a way to truly keep distancing 100%. The vigilance should we need to teach remotely at any point this year. If we as teachers could support Hybrid learning as I feel this is truly the
*Teams are learning new ways to collaborate and share our needed to maintain this is physically draining and it constantly feels like I am preventing students from being part of a have something ready for families and waiting, this would help to reduce stress for safest way to have students in our schools while
workload community by continually telling them to keep away from me and from peers. any teacher, cohort, team, grade or school that needs to shift gears on a moments protecting the health and wellness of educators,
Morse Street School *Arrival/Dismissal Procedures are going smoothly *Copier hasn't been working consistently making it challenging to get materials out to students and families. notice and would help this roll smoothly. staff, students and families.
Pownal Elementary Great support and help with anything I might need from Erin Continueing with forwarding information and keeping the staff up to date is very
School Dow. Some times getting stock that we might need, but that seems to leveled out. helpful. I feel the year so far is going along good.
Pownal Elementary Smaller class sizes have allowed for more individualized work I think the Hybrid + plan at PES looks like it will allow students to be here more time
School with students. Prepping and planning the at home work. throughout the week which will help with the planning at home work issue.
When we go green in Pownal, this will alleviate some of those stressors. When we
Children are doing well wearing masks, small class size offers The home days and making sure children have what they need to be successful is at times challenging for classroom go green, there is also a concern about more bodies being closer together and
more connections for not only teachers but other students they teachers. It's hard to gain momentum on and off again, and keeping everyone and everything straight is challenging. Covid. To do this well, we need as close to a zero tolerance as possible for
wouldn't normally play with. It feels more human. Children are Children's stamina is tricky too for on/off days and returning after being away for so long. For me, (school counselor), sickness in our building. Coughing and runny noses, (without documented allergies
participating more, seeming more confident in smaller groups teaching double (all day Wednesday and all day Thursday) and trying to only stay in the classroom for no more than 15 or recent documented negative Covid test), in my opinion, children must go home. I
and bonding differently. It's wonderful to teach small class sizes minutes (so I don't have to quarantine should there be covid) is challenging. I need the whiteboard and document camera for realize I don't know all the details of children's health, nor should I, but we all need
and give extra attention and support. At Pownal, our principal many of my lessons so I try to mix it up and do half indoors and move outside for the second half when I can. Teaching to feel as safe as possible coming to school. If there are any symptoms, please,
Pownal Elementary has been very supportive with outdoor spaces and working out during Covid requires more thinking about how to do it properly and that part is exhausting at times. There have been some please, please send the children home and parents must pick them up as soon as
School problems as they arise. coughing students and runny noses which elevates my stress level and the stress level of other teachers. possible.
Pownal Elementary Strong communication from our administrator. The kids have
School been incredibly adaptable to all of the changes! The mask!
Pownal Elementary In general it has gone good. Buses in Pownal ok even if we go Vital Oxide product. Many complaints about staining. Although using it I find no staining on my clothing. It is mixed with
School green. water to the point I am afraid it might freeze on the bus at night. none things going well as can be expected.
I am the K/1 Remote Teacher for the district this Fall. I have
previously been the 2nd grade teacher at PES for the past two I'm very concerned that the remote program will
years. Remote learning with Kindergarten and 1st Grade has not continue this Spring. I'm concerned that
been INCREDIBLE! I've been so impressed with how capable something going so well for so many will have to
these young students are learning on zoom. We are having live end in December. I know money is the
classes each day, and this has made for such better learning roadblock, but I feel like if the program is working
and fun compared to the Spring. All students are showing up for the students, families, and teachers, it would
Pownal Elementary ready to learn and share. It feels like we are really building a Having dates when students can join (the 1st week of each month, for example), so be a real loss if we weren't able to finish the
School community together even though we are online! Having new students join the class each week. Getting kids up to date (and parents) has been a lot of extra work. that it isn't random. school year together!
I have had tremendous support from my colleagues, the I appreciated the planning time that we built into our last PLD. Could we have a few
Pownal Elementary administration and families. It is obvious that a great deal of additional early release days? This would be especially helpful around conference Thank you for reaching out and asking for my
School work went into keeping staff and students safe. I feel that my biggest challenge is time, there is never enough of it. Everything takes longer than it used to. and report card times. opinion. I feel lucky to work for this district.
Mostly the students are doing well with this
Employee attendance Driving bus way too much Hire drivers strange time we are in
22