SOURCE: https://www.rsu5.org/fs/resource-manager/view/ac52a5b0-18d9-411b-b046-e02f90e072b1
SECTION: /board-of-directors-and-policies/board-agendas-and-minutes/agendas
TITLE: November 4, 2020
TYPE: Finalsite-PDF
============================================================

What building do you
spend most of your
time at? What has gone well so far since September? What have been your biggest challenges? What are your ideas for improvement? What are your other comments or concerns?
Worried about going red in the winter. Hopefully
that will not happen! Yellow is working really well
for my children and it allows me to be in the
Central Office Everything seems to be back to "normal" as it can be at Central Managing the increased work flow along with being home with children half time. I think we are all doing the best we can office more.
I feel good about all the work we did over the
summer to prepare for reopening and I think we
learned that there are always going to be things
we can't adequately anticipate and plan for as
long as there are so many unknowns. We all
Staff are in good spirits and the nutrition program is prepared to Meal numbers are down overall, and free and reduced percentages have dropped dramatically due to meals being free to all Continue to prioritize and improve communication between all departments about need to remind ourselves that this is likely a very
serve students in any reopening level. Lots of parent students. Fortunately, the October enrollment report was unaffected because last year's eligibilities were still valid as of changes to procedures, as small changes can have ripple effects that can be long-term situation and we will need to continue
Central Office appreciation for remote meal options. October 1. Remote meals access can use some improvement, which is a work in progress. anticipated/planned for as long as information flows freely. to be flexible and innovative to succeed.
Policy around if/when you should be tested for Covid-19, when you should stay
I think the district has done a great job of notifying staff and home, if you stay home out of caution (etc. most likely allergy symptoms but also
families of Covid-19 cases and reacted to them with the right Reacting to the ever changing guidance of Childcare Licensing and finding the spot where we are following their protocols under umbrella of Covid-19 symptoms) being able to work from home versus taking Finding staffing for programs in the Hybrid Plus
Central Office amount of caution. and procedures of the school that our program is located in. a sick day. model.
Great planning by the Admins over the summer helped with Late direction by the DOE and our district's waiting for it led to a planning crunch at the last minute. The start of the school
organizing the start of the school year. There was a lot of year was challenging juggling regular new school year priorities to the demands of a new school layered with COVID
collaboration and digging in to get the work done by staff. There demands. Additional responsibilities and late requests added stress to the eight hour day and fulfilling the requests in a
Central Office was good leadership by staff and technology teams! timely manner. Taking action earlier. I am concerned about going to the Red Plan.
Fellow staff members adhering to face mask Masks for sports teams, especially while competing against other towns. They wear Our Admin team has done a fantastic job
Central Office guidelines/distancing, etc. This is greatly appreciated. My anxiety them all day at school, then don't need them on the field? That doesn't seem wise. navigating this situation.
Having a smaller class of pre-k, instead of 16 in each session I
Durham Community have 12 in the AM and 9 in the PM. With these lower numbers
School it has been easier to distance.
Durham Community No time to plan with the new hybrid curriculum. Spending hours each evening/on the weekends trying to plan and adapt my
School Communication from administration, students' adaptiveness curriculum. More planning time.
Small class sizes has made adapting to the COVID-19 Staff burnout-personal burnout-kid burnout.
requirements more manageable. Kids have been great with Community within school suffers when total focus
Durham Community mask wearing, spacing, learning the norm of a different school Planning for outside, inside, extra classes, red, orange, yellow, green, yellow+...this is a lot when considering my teaching When we look to make shifts/changes (yellow to green OR yellow to yellow+) we is read/write/math without the other pieces that
School atmosphere. load of 10 years of kids (Pk-8) for each of these levels. need time and direct guidance in what to do and how to do it. make school a community for our kids.
Durham Community So far delivery of important information, pick up & drop off have Reinventing a number of lessons that can work interchangeably for both in class
School gone really well. Biggest challenges have been spacing students during activities, clean up, and extra planning for remote learners. and remote learners to save on planning time.
Planning time, by far. I feel safe in the hybrid model, but planning takes so much longer because of it.
The students have been very adaptable for the most part. The
Durham Community smaller class sizes have also enabled me to differentiate more Also, social distancing has still been challenging, even in yellow, mostly because kids are so used to being near each other Minimizing meetings and giving us more planning time whenever possible would go
School easily with students. for partner and group work. a long way for us to be able to sustain this work this year.
Stay hybrid....with winter/flu season coming and less opportunity to have classes
Scheduling services for special needs students given half the time, extra paperwork changes for individual plans due to outside, I feel there is more risk with larger numbers. Staying in hybrid thru winter
Durham Community All staff has been amazing at making the start of an unusual Covid, changes occuring daily and weekly and having to adjust quickly, dealing with student emotional needs related to seems safer than risking bringing all students back 5 days and then possibly having
School year start off as positive as can be. school changes. to go remote due to an outbreak. Not ideal, but safer. Going "green" too soon.
Durham Community Schedule,
School Staff has been working very hard and has been flexible finding space, maintaining distance from students/staff Technology within my room
I am very concerned about how we will choose to
handle the stretch of time between Thanksgiving
As a teacher who works with students throughout our entire building, the amount of time and energy it takes to create and the winter holiday break. I anticipate a lot of
The weather has been beautiful and has allowed me to conduct individual kits of materials and to ensure that everything is quarantined and sanitized has been difficult. It is taking at least travel and visits to families during this stretch of
most of my teaching outside. The smaller groups of students 50% more time to prep my lessons, in addition to having to rework almost my entire curriculum because I cannot use many time and am worried that those additional points
have felt manageable in terms of maintaining social distancing materials and lessons that I've used in the past. Additionally, there are a number of students who wear improperly fitting of contact, coupled with the colder weather, will
guidelines. I feel much safer being at work than I anticipated masks or who have masks that are exposing noses (sometimes accidentally, sometimes intentionally), so managing Having a streamlined system for making note of students that we see without significantly increase staff exposure to the virus,
Durham Community feeling in July, but this is due mostly to being outdoors nearly all reminders has been a challenge. The ever-changing rosters of students as we change groups and bring back more students adequate masks to ensure communication is happening to families or that we can particularly for those of us who don't work with
School day. has also been challenging in terms of adequately preparing for my classes. provide them with what they need. just one single group of students.
Having Friday as an at home check in day for all students, to get them caught up on
Durham Community Workload and not enough time to complete all the extra work we have/ expectations. As well as the students, have proper missing work - connect with teachers, and also provides teachers with extra prep
School Seeing staff members and students. time to meet with students and get them caught up. time. - This is a huge concern.
Drop off & pick up times. The way they are handled now has
Durham Community been going great. Not having the large group of people in the
School office and lobby makes for a calmer start and end to the day. Not having available subs to cover classes!
Students are getting complacent about saftey protocals. For example many are not actually sanitizing their hands on the way As we learn more about CDC guidlines, it seem
Durham Community Masks are staying on and we have been able to make some into the building. They are just touching the sanitizer without putting any on their hands. Also, keeping students apart is I would like to see the students eating outside. Supervising lunch, indoors with more and more that 6 feet space may not be
School adjustments as needed. increasingly difficult. unmasked students is a big concern. enough for safe indoor social distancing.
I see many children (excluding k-2) horsing
around in the lunch lines clearly not social
Durham Community Better communication, and definitely should put a hold on composting and any other distancing, and it doesn't seem to be a concern
School Our hot lunch participation is steadily increasing. communication activity that consists of kids congregating around waist bins. to most monitors.
1

What building do you
spend most of your
time at? What has gone well so far since September? What have been your biggest challenges? What are your ideas for improvement? What are your other comments or concerns?
Durham Community
School "Combat Pay" for teachers
I enjoy the small class sizes. Students have received more 1:1
Durham Community support which is essential since most students are behind from
School the spring. Trying to teach students in the classroom as well as remote. No days for planning mid-week Teachers need more time for planning.
I'm concerned about the workload and
expectations on classroom teachers. Prepping
for yellow days (individualized to each student)
and in school days and trying to maintain
Right now it's amount of workload. In my position, I'm having to plan for two ed techs (instead of just one), as well as myself. distancing and CDC guidelines with ever
The last two weeks I have spent well over 2 hours after work to ensure that everyone had appropriate plans for all their increasing class numbers as we invite students
groups, as well as all the materials. I'm also spending additional time outside of school hours to review notes, running back 5 days. I've walked in on colleagues crying
Durham Community I'm not in a full classroom...something that went well was records, and create resources for parents. Something else that has been frustrating is a lack of clear expectations around I'm not sure..I know it's unlikely we'll get more planning/prep time within contractual more than once from the overwhelm. This isn't
School assessing all students and getting small groups up and running. intervention and remote students. hours. sustainable.
Lack of concern for the mental health of staff who
already go above and beyond when we're not
living in a pandemic world. We are asking people
to adapt and change without consistent and
equitable support, training, and practice. There's
a feeling of complete disregard for how
Less pressure to be synchronous, especially with such limited training and significantly the mounding expectations for
Durham Community Having students back in the classroom. Navigating and tracking in class students and work for at home students. Synchronous teaching with students who have opportunity to practice. And many students lack the training on how to be digital educational staff is affecting mental and physical
School Students adjusting to safety protocols. significant disparities in how to use technology, as well as vastly different learning profiles and abilities. citizens. well-being.
The students have been very excited to be back at school, I've
Durham Community been able to do a lot of small group work & we have not had to Planning appropriate level & engaging work without devices. This seemed much more manageable last year when we were
School go to red. able to use Google Classroom. Getting devices to our students would be very helpful to them.
Frequent changes in schedule (5 day students, synchronous learning schedules) cause difficulty in providing support to
students at the moment they need it, has created repetitive paper work regarding IEPs, time to cope with changes has felt
brief.
Keeping students 3 ft apart is challenging still, although mask wear and hand sanitizing has gone well.
Being able to see students and coworkers in person. Some Slow down with changes. Help staff better understand when and why changes may
Durham Community positive changes with highest needs students returning 5 days Supporting students in keeping pace during yellow/independent work days has been challenging. be taking place before opening information up for parents. It's difficult to field
School per week. questions and send a cohesive message to parents when we're unsure.
I'm genuinely concerned about the mental health
of staff and students. The past few months have
Durham Community been overwhelming and things feel like they are
School It has been wonderful to see kids back in the classroom. The technology demands are overwhelming. Revisit the synchronous expectations. becoming more overwhelming.
I am burnt out after the 6th week of school. There is simply not enough prep time to keep up with the demands that teaching
during a pandemic requires. Teachers are being asked to do double the workload (prepare lessons for students both at
home and at school, as well as give feedback to all students) with even less prep time due to shortened specials and being
asked to attend meetings.
The other challenge is that there is NO consistency for teachers. Every week there is a new change that drastically impacts
our ability to plan for and teach all students. Suddenly we have more students in our class that are now attending 5 days a
week because they have significant gaps, yet there is no plan to support them. Suddenly students are quarantining and we
don't have a plan for how to support them. Suddenly we are now in a Hybrid plus model and synchronous learning is now the I just can't stress enough that the amount of work
Students and staff have quickly acclimated to the protocols in expectation, but we are also told that we don't want students sitting at home on their laptops all day. -Staff meetings on Wednesday afternoons should be dedicated solely to prep time on teachers shoulders is simply too much and I
place that are necessary to keep everyone safe. Mask wearing, I understand that we are teaching in the middle of a pandemic and that flexibility is needed, but in no other profession are for teachers. foresee our district losing a lot of great teachers
hand sanitizing and keeping distance (for the most part) are you asked to profoundly change what your job looks like on a dime. Teachers are constantly in limbo planning for -Non-essential tasks should be removed from teacher's plates (i.e. planning for throughout this year or not returning next year.
now a "normal" part of the school day. yellow/maybe green/maybe red and it is unmanageable. morning advisory meetings, report card comments, extended advisory planning) While administrators say they recognize our
Bill Ridge has been instrumental in helping the middle school Having students rotate attendance each Friday makes it incredibly hard to keep "A day" students on the same track as "B -Make Fridays an entirely remote day where teachers are able to check in with efforts, it seems like more and more work is
Durham Community teachers feel supported and prepared for synchronous day" students. From a planning perspective it creates an absolute headache that could easily be solved by doing 1 entirely students 1 on 1 through video conferencing to help students that are falling behind, loaded one each week as expectations increase
School teaching. remote day a week. then the afternoon can be used for PLC time/prep time. and plans change yet again.
I hope people continue to be on top of it, social
Anxiety about contracting the corona virus and bringing it to our set of senior citizen parents, or somehow being a silent Reminders from admin to constantly be vigilant, without instilling fear. Creating a distancing and that we can maintain the
I think most people have been using their PPE, increasing spreader. The constant threat of wondering if this is the day I mess up and breathe in the virus and worry that we'll lose culture of positivity rather than focusing on the negative, but not toxic positivity. momentum we have going into the winter
Durham Community hygiene standards, and it has been really great to be with the loved ones due to helping a small child who's mask is drooping, or just having natural responses to the demands of my Acknowledging the threat, and providing a forum for people to express because I would hate to have to lose what we do
School kids again in a safe way. position, working with all kids. etc. vulnerabilities but feeling held and supported. have.
2

What building do you
spend most of your
time at? What has gone well so far since September? What have been your biggest challenges? What are your ideas for improvement? What are your other comments or concerns?
What we are doing currently seems to be
working well. I worry that if we move to a
green/hybrid plus with more or all students in
attendance at once, it will be exceedingly
challenging to ensure that Covid guidelines for
spacing, handwashing, etc are being met
consistently. In addition, I am concerned about
Small group size which makes adherence to Covid guidelines the developmental appropriateness of students
possible and allows for developmentally appropriate learning needing to be seated at tables more to ensure
opportunities for Kindergarteners (space for movement within As we look ahead with planning, we could place more of an emphasis on selecting spacing in a larger group and how that will
the classrooms; ability to work with small groups/individuals key lessons/concepts within a block of time to allow for more responsive planning compromise the types group activity (read-
more readily; use of manipulative materials that can be used in and ensure students are receiving in-person instruction in critical areas versus strict alouds; Morning Meetings; use of manipulative
Durham Community shifts); outdoor classroom space; hybrid plan with practice work Limited flexibility with pacing / curriculum due to students having fewer days of in person instruction and the necessity to adherence to curriula sections/units of study. I think we are moving in this direction materials; movement) that are cornerstones of
School for home days (parent feedback has been positive) keep both groups (A & B) in sync already. Kindergarten learning.
It's extremely challenging planning for remote days along with the regular school day and not having any planning time to do
both. I rarely have a lunch time and time to make it to the bathroom because I'm constantly planning, not to mention that with
all this demand, there is less planning time this year. Also, teaching one cohort while students who are here 5 days are
supposed to be their remote work is very difficult, as they are often talking through 2nd day lessons, and not working on the I find that I'm stretching myself thin with the
remote work unless they have guidance from me. I feel that while the administration has the learning of the students at the extreme demand in planning, and the
Durham Community front of their minds, they are neglecting the demands on their teachers. Every other school that I know of that is doing this More planning time for teachers is a must, especially teachers who teach all responsibility of taking care of 5 day students
School I'm still standing. hybrid model, has been appreciative of their teachers enough to provide them with a planning day. subjects. while I'm teaching the other cohort.
Since the start of school, I've not been able to spend any time with my loved ones. Members of my family are
immunocompromised, and my partner is the sole caretaker of her 94 year old grandmother. I absolutely can not take a risk
and see those I love when our school's only strategy to keep the students and staff safe from COVID is a survey. At the very The school week should be shortened by one day (Wednesday or Friday) to
least, we should be checking temperatures at the door. Additionally, I don't know if the district considered the amount of accommodate teacher/student conferencing and teacher planning. All mandatory
work that is required in a hybrid model. Emails from students and parents have more than doubled. I'm trying to meet the staff meetings should be cancelled to accommodate more planning time for
needs of kids at home and at school, and I'm given no additional time to meet those needs. Other schools in the area are teachers. Parents should continue to be surveyed on their child's COVID
taking off one day a week to do this. I'm concerned about kids that aren't attending their synchronous Yellow Day classes. symptoms, but we should further protect students and staff by requiring temperature
This is just one more thing that I have to follow up on (once again, with no additional time). In her email to the staff this checks at the door. We need substitutes, in order to get more candidates in the
The addition of Bill Ridge as the Synchronous Learning weekend, Superintendent Foley noted that we need to "remain...adaptable to ever changing needs," but it feels like only door, the district should pay for fingerprinting (regardless of how many times the
Technology Integrator has been excellent. He's incredibly teachers and frontline staff are doing the adapting. Administration hasn't adapted our weekly staff meetings to include more person has worked in the district) and increase substitute pay to make RSU-5 more
helpful. Additionally, the smaller class sizes have allowed me to time for planning, nor has the school board adapted our school week to accommodate time for us to satisfactorily respond to competitive. We need more Ed-Techs. The demands of chaperoning, duties, and
Durham Community create an excellent classroom community in a shorter period of the needs of students. working with students at home and at-school has already overwhelmed the time of I love my job and my students, but It's only
School time. the few ed-techs that we have. October, and I'm already burnt out.
Durham Community The students are doing very well wearing their masks, the Scheduling, with so many different lunch and recess times, there is a lot of Special Ed coverage that goes towards covering See if we can reduce staffing used for duties, or get more students into larger Scheduling and the staff needed for a "Hybrid
School hybrid seems to be going better than I expected. duty which leaves less time for providing IEP services. groups plus" model
I want the kids all back but my concerns are of
the unknown. Will we start a spread at our
school? How sick will we all get? What will
happen from there?
Also when we think and plan for kids coming
back to hybrid plus, it feels like it will work but in
reality will it work? Will we be able to safely eat
at 6 feet? I am talking real 6 feet not 5 feet and
calling it close enough. I know 3 feet doesn't
always work. With the temperatures getting
colder, outside learning will be less. Keeping
Small class size has given an opportunity to really get to know Allow schools to move at the pace of their class and not have to stay with what the kids on task outside in the cold would be very
Durham Community the kids academically. It has been somewhat easy to keep Planning for both in school kids and work at home kids. Trying to keep the lessons going and getting the most out of the coaches are telling us we need to stick to just because other schools are at a hard. Plus it would be difficult to eat, read, write
School them distanced even when stuck inside because of weather. time we have. different pace. Basically allowing for curriculum flexibility amongst the schools. with mittens on.
The students have gotten into the routines. The small class
sizes are delightful. I have had technology support. The Finding a place to eat without the students. The 5 day students. Having time with students to make up work when they miss Concerned with too many kids in the building as
Durham Community students have had technology support. I feel supported to take a day/class. Planning and preparing new work/lessons that can be accessed/taught/completed with technology. Learning Another technology person per building would be fantastic so we can get the help we invite more in for 5 days. They do not stay
School the curriculum at a slower pace. new technology. we need faster without stressing them out. away from each other enough.
Teachers need more time to plan and prep with colleagues. PLC times are shorter
but demands are high, but teachers still need time to problem solve and plan
collaboratively. Staff meeting time could be dedicated planning time. Planning time
Having many children attend school every day, especially the high number of staff children often goes away and is replaced by other meetings and demands by specialists and
Making at-home practice engaging and realistic for young learners strategists.
High stress levels and having to do many things at once while prioritizing. Should I spend the time with this student
assessing them, teaching them, or preparing them for at home learning for the next day Teachers need to feel somehow united with other colleagues. Some kind of
The constant pressure of feeling like more students are being added- hybrid plus and "green" puts an incredible amount of breakfast or other distanced social gathering could help. We are so isolated that Teachers are losing positivity and momentum
Working with my colleagues in person stress on day to day functions of teachers. What will tomorrow or next week be like is a constant worry. sometimes it doesn't feel like we're in it together. when more changes come constantly. Of course
Parents have been VERY supportive Making instruction and opportunities "equitable" for all students teachers want the best for students, but
Durham Community Instructional coaches and administration have been realistic Worrying about my health and safety demands are increasing without consideration of
School about adapting curriculum demands teacher well-being and sustainability.
3

What building do you
spend most of your
time at? What has gone well so far since September? What have been your biggest challenges? What are your ideas for improvement? What are your other comments or concerns?
The scheduling for lunch and recess is back to
back. There is no turn around time to clean the
tables between groups which then means we are
holding up one group in order to get the tables
cleaned. The lines for hot lunch are long and it
More staff would ALWAYS be an improvement. takes more time for all kids to be served. This
I believe the hybrid option has been what has gone best. I also feel like we need to support more self care. The new "normal" can be can leave very little time to eat.
Keeping groupings small allows for the ability to reinforce extremely exhausting and it seems harder than ever to stop planning for ever When staff are out and ed techs are pulled to
distancing and health practices. Everyone is doing an amazing Scheduling students. When students are in the building only 2/3 days a week and receive multiple services it has been very changing scenarios and take time for ourselves. If we found small ways to provide a cover classrooms this also leaves duty coverage
Durham Community job pitching in to keep everything sanitized! (Thank you hard to create a consistent schedule. Assessments (F&P, NWEA....) are another layer that can impact schedules as well as moment of mindfulness (cup of coffee, skip a staff meeting???) it could go a long issues that can impact the ability to turn the
School custodians and bus drivers!) multiple other duties that interfere with my ability to schedule students. way. cafeteria around for the next group.
I really enjoy the outdoor spaces. I hope that
students will continue to use them through the
other seasons, and long after this pandemic
Our cleaning practices have been amazing. The bus drivers and ends. I really enjoy seeing the students, and how
custodians, along with the staff, have done a wonderful job hard they are working to learn in this
keeping our building sanitized and clean. The students have environment. Lack of staff in the cafeteria during
done well following our safety guidelines. The students have my lunch duty is a big concern.
adapted to wearing masks far better than expected. I am very I think that staff does a lot to process the new information, policies, and procedures. Another concern or worry is that I hope students
proud of the students for being so resilient in this time. They work hard to plan, prep, and instruct different students on different days. I think at Durham Community school are provided the
Staff in our school are working very hard to make sure that the we should start showing them some appreciation to the staff. Things like coffee in same learning opportunities at Wolfe's Neck
students are feeling comfortable, and have the best learning the mornings, bring snack cart back, skip a staff meeting, or appreciation prizes. I Farm as the Freeport students.
environment they can offer. My biggest challenge so far is making sure I use my time with the student's wisely. I want to make sure that I am supporting think Staff needs to be recognized, and how are they are working to make student I can say that I am a bit concerned about getting
I appreciate how our administration is working diligently to make them in the way they need it most, but also making sure I am keeping my classroom sanitized and protocols are being done. education work. COVID-19, and passing it on to students and
sure our building and staff are following guidelines and It is a change that I need to be aware of for safety in our school. Also, scheduling and sharing my students, and making sure staff in my building. I am very diligent about my
procedures to make our school safer. I appreciate all of the they are still getting their services seems like it is difficult for all service providers. We have limited time to see the students, Another idea for improvement is really be clear and timely with communications to cleaning practices and sanitation. I will do what I
Durham Community work that has gone into making learning spaces and purchases and many of them have shared services. parents and staff. Staff and parents are being bombarded with information, most of it can so that I can be in the building with the
School made to make them usable for extended periods of time. is very fluid, having information that is clear and from administration. students, providing them education and support.
I am also concerned about the reality that at
some point this winter we will likely need to go
remote. I feel like we've been given no
We have been given more staff meeting time than in a typical year, to spend on professional development and no time to put
planning and prepping, however it is still not enough to meet the current demands. I plans into place for that possibility. If we're
One of the biggest challenges is keeping students at least 3 feet apart at all times. Despite teaching the skill and reminders, think for the time being, all staff meeting time should be dedicated to planning and expected to improve remote teaching compared
Durham Community Students are doing well wearing their masks. The routine of it is just really difficult for them to stay distanced. The other challenge has been the amount of time that is going into planning prepping for students at-home days as well as an opportunity to look more to what it was in the spring, then we need to start
School students attending school every other day is relatively smooth. for in-person instruction and at-home days for students. thoroughly at their at-home work. having those conversations now.
Feeling comfortable with communication about how staff is feeling and their comfort level communicating that.
Stress levels are high and it seems as though leaders are avoiding discussing feelings and emotions at this time. Higher up
positions are being positive , but seem to be ignoring the mental and emotional health of staff. Going about business as
usual instead of acknowledging that things are not usual.
Students washing their hands with soap and
It does not feel like the mental and physical well being of staff is at the forefront of discussions. It feels like a push to get water is not a priority. Some students do not
things moving and staff need to have questions answered and more time to process and discuss whats going well and what know how to wash properly still. Twenty seconds
their concerns are. is important.
The hallways were not cleaned for over a week with spots on the floor that showed they were not clean. Not all offices are Hire more staff to clean the buildings throughout the day. There are many reminders of wearing masks
getting a deep clean either. properly.
There have been a few cases of COVID in the district but no Spacing in the hallways for arrival is tight. Maybe staggered arrivals would help?
cases would be better. Going into the winter months knowing that more kids will be here and inside is concerning as distancing is challenging. Not all families are doing their health checks.
Durham Community Slow down the push to get back to our typical ways. Remember that everyone has
School Students are happy to be back and are enjoying time together. There have been a few cases of COVID in the district but no cases would be better. emotions and we are all human beings working through the stress of a pandemic.
I'm concerned that as numbers are rising in the
Planning for school and home learning days and dealing with the logistics of the hybrid model, new protocols, etc. There is a state and the weather makes it less possible to
Students have adjusted well to the changes in routines and new tremendous amount of thought and work that goes into managing the demands of the hybrid schedule. It often feels get outside, we're working to move more
protocols. We've been able to utilize outside spaces regularly. overwhelming. Any single change sets off a domino effect, resulting in considerable reshuffling, reorganizing and much hair students into school. While I understand the
The Agenda we've set up for home learning days has been well pulling. It feels like as soon as I have reconfigured or adapted, something else gets changed. I am also concerned about how need to maximize the amount of in-school time
received by families and students have been very responsible slowly we are moving in the curriculum, though I feel there have been noticeable benefits to some reduction in the pace. Minimize PD during this year. It's hard to find the bandwidth to do any additional students receive, I also fear that in our rush to do
Durham Community about bringing materials between home and school. No classes Finally, maintaining social distancing has been very challenging for students. They're good sports about it, but need continual thinking and hard not to resent the additional demands (time out of the classroom, this, there might be some safety compromises.I'd
School of Covid at DCS so far -- a big win for all! reminders. sub plans, additional reading, etc.) when we're already stretched to the limit. like to see this proceed cautiously.
We need more time, we are doing 2x the prep work (which won't change if we go to
synchronous learning, I think that will just make it tougher work load wise especially
as a science teacher, trying to do labs, modeling, activities with one group and then
Having to create plans for my kids in front of me, my kids at home for remote learning, and a total separate plan for my kids plan for another will make it tough. Right now at least I know I have to plan 2x every
Freeport High School It has been extremely stressful and overwhelming. that are in quarantine. class period)
Freeport High School Seeing students in person has been wonderful. Keeping track of students on their remote learning days and our full time remote learners. I wish I had any.
4

What building do you
spend most of your
time at? What has gone well so far since September? What have been your biggest challenges? What are your ideas for improvement? What are your other comments or concerns?
We're burning out very quickly and I'm not sure
staying afloat, keeping up with everything (planning for kids at school and kids at home, grading & feedback for kids at how we're going to make this last all year. It's
the hard work our admin has put in to support us, collaborating school and kids at home, emailing parents/counselors of kids doing nothing, figuring out how to do activities in my classes only October and we're all way beyond
Freeport High School with the other teachers to figure out how to survive this year this year, making sure all technology pieces work, monitoring the students' mental & emotional health, etc) fewer after school meetings so we have time to plan/grade/help each other/breathe exhausted.
The staff should have been tested before we
The schedule. Between cohorts and working at 2 different schools (FHS & R10) its a nightmare. We in CHOICES are short started school. Our school insurance covered
Freeport High School No violently acting students so far! staffed so if 1 person is absent we are behind the 8 ball. Steady Schedule testing so cost shouldn't have been an issue.
It would be helpful to have a special education teacher to be in charge of all the fully Could there be a reconsideration for PD days to
Freeport High School Seeing students is the best part of this plan. Balancing the needs of students who are hybrid, 5 dayers, and full remote kids all together. remote special education students. done at home rather than come into the building?
*We have never had any sort of status update
since the year began as to what protocols are
working and what has changed in the last 8
weeks. How have the protocols provided to us in
the first days of school evolved as the year has
progressed?
*Staff have picked up the "slack" over and over
this year to accommodate the hybrid plan. Yet
these "extra efforts" are becoming the new
normal. Stuff HAS to come off of staff "plates" in
order to maintain this effort!
*Question whether decisions about transition
from yellow to green (or red) are based on full-
Revision of FHS schedule from alternating blocks to something where all classes district data or the result of a small group of vocal
Freeport High School Student compliance with COVID Protocols Infrequent classroom time with students. meet every day for a shorter time period stakeholders having the ear of administration.
It's very hard to keep kids social distancing. Even with the adjustments, the halls can feel crowded during passing times. Have one day be fully remote (no new teaching material) for all so teachers can Teachers are working double time and doing a
Some classrooms feel a bit tight. It's hard connecting with students at times to give them one on one support and catch them hold office hours, support students further, allow students to catch up. And for our good job. We need to support them as well as
Freeport High School Everyone is doing very well wearing masks and sanitizing. up. high achieving students, they need one on one support at times as well. the students.
I understand the idea of all teachers having to be
synchronous, but I don't think it is necessary for
student success. I think that the students need a
balance of asynchronous and synchronous
classes so they can continue to work on their
own organizational skills and time management
skills. I think the students should be able to take
breaks from the computer on their remote days
and get the work done at their own pace while
also balancing the schedule of online remote
classes. It is a great skill for the students to be
learning. Time management is one of the biggest
challenges for students when they leave for
college and during this crazy year it is great that
we can work on that skill with them to help
prepare them as early as we can. I think that we
can use advisory as well as a time to help
students with time management skills and show
them resources of how to be successful. I
personally believe that the hybrid schedule we
have now at the high school is working for
students because they are getting into a routine.
I think that improvements can be made and
guidelines for both ways of classes should be
set, but overall most teachers are doing a great
job of balancing the work between in class and at
The start of school was obviously hectic which I expected, but home for the students.
since the first week, it seems that the students are settling into a I like the idea of certain IEP/504 students coming 5 days a week to make sure they Overall, I think the administration is doing a great
nice routine. It seems to me that they know what is expected of are keeping up with the material. I think that is a big step in the right direction but it job of making sure students follow the rules and
them and know how the schedule is working. Small class sizes has to be used effectively. That should help with the lack of student work at home to make sure students are receiving everything
have been imperative for the hybrid model to work. It has and allow those kids the ability to be caught up in school rather than depending on they need. It is clearly a different year and
allowed me the opportunity to get to know my students so much them to do it at home. I think that we should also be stressing time management everyone has needed to adjust. I think everyone
quicker and develop relationships with them. It has also forced skills this year and having students being responsible for their own work. We can for the most part has been open to the idea of
the students to be more accountable in class because there is use this year to direct more attention to different skills that are imperative in college change. It is the job of the teachers to adapt and
more time for me to personally check-in with them and make and any career path the students choose after high school such as time make sure student success is put first. A lot of
sure they are on task and understanding. I feel like the students My biggest challenge is certain students who do not participate in the work at home. It actually isn't a large number, but I management and work ethic. At the high school especially, we can use advisory to people have different opinions, but only teachers
are learning more skills by having to be more responsible for don't want them to fall behind. I would also say my biggest challenge so far is time. Time to grade, stay organized, and to help students with these skills and talk about how to improve them. We do this now, are seeing what works in the classroom and what
Freeport High School their own work at certain times. give student feedback. but we can put more of an emphasis on it. doesn't.
5

What building do you
spend most of your
time at? What has gone well so far since September? What have been your biggest challenges? What are your ideas for improvement? What are your other comments or concerns?
We cannot go green. It is impossible to fit all of
the students back in the building and follow CDC
guidelines--which is not happening even now:
getting students to keep the 3-ft distance
between each other is basically impossible,
despite reminders; face-coverings "accidentally"
slip below students' noses, and "sips" of water
have become several sips over prolonged
periods of time (aka face-airing). We are given a
choice of being mask-and-distance police which
interrupts the lesson and momentum, or turning a
blind eye to the less egregious violations so that
there is some kind of learning continuity. Also, I
and other teachers are foregoing our own safety
by getting close to students without additional
PPE (only masks) because it is impossible to
give one-on-one, private help from afar, and the
face shields and/or safety glasses fog up
regularly. All of this is particularly worrisome
since the science suggests that teenagers are
more like adults when it comes to the spread of
Covid-19, and the likely reason for us not having
more cases is our low numbers within the state.
We are holding our breath, like everyone in the
world, juggling safety with normalcy, and it is
extremely exhausting. Yellow is the hardest
mode to implement, and yet it is the best we can
do in terms of in-person instruction. Please,
school board, acknowledge this. We are your
teachers and we are valiantly trying to make it
Juggling the different schedules and groups [Cohort A, B, & C (synchronous) with the different-colored days and rotating Do not make more changes. We are finally acclimating to the crazy schedule and work; please, please, please don't squeeze us
Freeport High School Making connections with students in person again Fridays while trying to keep everyone in approximately the same place learning-wise] might gain some momentum if it stays the same. more.
Public perception, FUELLED BY THE SCHOOL
In most neighboring districts students and teachers get a remote day per week to COMMITTEE (???), that RSU5 teachers are lazy
connect with students who are not able to access their full education due to lack of and selfish for being concerned about their
normal structures (due to the global pandemic and the yellow plan). I think having a health, that of their loved ones, child care, etc... I
remote day of office hours and/or scheduled individual help for struggling students can tell never in a million years would I have
would be a huge improvement. I know that many of my students, that are voluntarily taken a job as a remote instructor.
unavailable due to limited direct contact time would benefit immeasurably. As it Remember, teachers are being asked to take a
stands at the HS– seeing one cohort one extra time a month is neither beneficial to substantial risk, work harder than they ever have,
the student nor does it serve the curriculum. It creates imbalance and creates and In the Spring teachers were heroes
scheduling issues (most HS teachers teach multiple sections of the same class... because they were adaptable and able to switch
class sizes, due to the cohort system, are small and actually, all do with the cohort system) and now all these classes are in different to remote instruction on a dime. Now we are
manageable. Students are more productive and much less Time to do everything we are asked to do. Public perception, FUELLED BY THE SCHOOL COMMITTEE, that RSU5 places much of the time due to one cohort getting an extra class per month. Pretzel villains because we can't engage your children
Freeport High School distracted. teachers are lazy and selfish for being concerned about their health and that of their loved ones. logic... it's twisted and confusing. sitting in their bedrooms and at your homes...
I wish we could go green but it looks like it cannot physically happen because of our
small classrooms ... Maybe we could have some temporary buildings -
I also wish we had a more simple schedule like pretty much all the other districts
Adjusting to synchronous teaching - Having to deal with so many technology issues - Planning is very different and around us: 2 days - Wednesday break - 2 days OR 4 days of school from Monday to There is no relief in sight as we will have to be
It's good to be physically at school in our classrooms and challenging - Callbacks: trying to figure out who is at school and when - Quarantined students who cannot come to school for Thursday and then one day break. It would be ideal to have that extra day to plan, hybrid all year long. It is overwhelming to think
Freeport High School actually see students almost 2 weeks - testing students is complicated - Feeling very overwhelmed with no relief in sight - grade or catch up with students who are behind. about this.
I am very concerned about the push to be
synchronous. I am using class time to
evaluate/assess student performance and I don't
Keeping track of the schedule and what is due when (for students). Wearing a mask all day and being mindful of all the extra feel that I can do that with a class online at the
things that we have to consider just to navigate the day. Not being able to circulate during class time and always same time. I don't feel that it is the best way to
remembering to keep a six-foot distance from students. Wearing the microphone and remembering to turn it off and on. teach/learn and I don't feel that is fair to force all
Remembering to fill out the daily health form. Not being able to smile at students. Not being able to see students' faces teachers to do it. Numerous students have
completely and not knowing what all of my new students look like. Only communicating with my eyes. Taking class time to thanked me for not being synchronous, as they
clean desks/chairs. Remembering what the rotating Friday day is going to be each week. Not being able to eat in the faculty Let us keep doing what we are doing and stop changing things (forcing synchronous are tired of dealing with technology issues and
room. Taking valuable class time to have professional days (October/November). The dread of being quarantined and having teaching/learning) mid-stream. There is nothing we can do until the CDC changes hearing teachers online. The one-size-fits-all
Freeport High School Seeing the students is wonderful! to teach online from home. guidelines or until there is a reliable and available vaccine. approach is not the answer.
Freeport High School Mask wearing, students willing to follow protocols Students maintaining distancing
6

What building do you
spend most of your
time at? What has gone well so far since September? What have been your biggest challenges? What are your ideas for improvement? What are your other comments or concerns?
The pace. I teach synchronously and having three White days in a row can be challenging. On the other hand, what I choose
to do with students during those three days is within my control. It's just a matter of finding the right pace.
Student productivity is less than previous years. Far more students doing far less work. Not much we can do about that,
especially for those students when they are at home.
Nice having kids in the building. I appreciate that we are staying in the hybrid
The technology has worked better/more smoothly than I Finding the right balance in the classroom, between the students in the room with me and those Zooming in. Need to keep mode
expected it to. both engaged and involved and live within the capability of the technology. Maintain robust tech support I appreciate the administrations' creative problem
Students are doing a pretty good job with CDC guidelines and I Be cognizant of teacher capacity solving
Freeport High School haven't had to do much correcting in that regard. Maintaining a healthy work/life balance. Continue to offer time for teachers to share ideas and strategies
Just like with anything new, it takes time to
adjust. Last spring when we were fully remote, I
believe things were starting to smooth out. I think
the hybrid plan will also take time to smooth out,
we need to give it time. I do not think bringing
more kids back would be helpful, it would just
cause confusion and disrupt the routine,
Freeport High School kids are wearing masks without major issues connecting with kids on the remote days continue the hybrid plan, I think that with time things will iron out resetting the progress we have made so far.
It would be helpful if we went 4 days and everyone had a day to take a deep breath It's extremely challenging, but it is working, and I
That we have stayed in class and not been forced to go remote. and get organized and work done. So many schools are going 4 days and having feel teachers are really trying to motivate
Also, I am slowly getting more students to engage in class and Getting students to talk ... masks seem to mute them. Also getting students to do work in a remote setting has been Wednesday as a catch up day which I feel would be helpful for students and students and keep them engaged. I just hope we
Freeport High School remotely. challenging. teachers. don't have to go red at any point in the year.
I think it would be beneficial for staff to have one day at home to work, similar to
I have been able to teach students synchronously (both at what other school districts do. It would allow us to catch up on planning and grading,
home and at school at the same) without a ton of issues. This I need to do more planning than usual in order to accommodate the new schedule and students who are at home when I am while also allowing students who are falling behind the opportunity to catch up as
Freeport High School has allowed me to stay close to the pace I am on most years. not teaching them synchronously with the students at school. well.
Freeport High School Staying on task Emails Take one day at a time Miss the students!
1. Getting to know the students and building meaningful relationships with them.
2. Finding the time to plan new activities and curriculum for students to do during remote learning days that are "engaging"
(adapting previous in class lessons for out of class to try to stay on track with curriculum)
3. Having enough time to quickly provide feedback to students on their work in and out of class.
4. Keeping PowerSchool up to date because grading is getting the back burner to planning. I feel it is more important to be
sure to make the most of the time I have with the kids when they are in front of me so my prep time is used primarily to plan
and prepare for that. I know the schedule is not going to change but I am aware that the majority of
5. Knowing how much it not enough or too much to assign to students to do for work at home. Trying to gauge how much districts in the state that are operating under the yellow hybrid model only have four
time students will need when completing work on their own. In teaching heterogeneous classes it is hard to ensure the teaching days a week. Most with Wednesdays to prep/grade/meet with students
amount of work is practical for all students. virtually who are struggling. If there is to become any sort of expectation that all HS
Because we were remote in the spring the students seem to 6. While I embrace the idea of a flipped classroom, there still has to be ample review in person for students to grasp complex teachers are teaching under the synchronous model (or if we want to feel like we
have a pretty solid grasp of how to use Google Classroom, concepts. This has put us rather far behind in working towards covering standards. are giving kids the education they came to FHS for) there has to be more time to
which we are required to use. This makes the remote learning 7. Mostly just not having enough time to do all the things that need to be done to be the best teacher I can be in order to prepare. Even not teaching synchronously, there does not seem to be nearly
days a little smoother because there are fewer barriers to provide my students with the best education possible. enough time to provide the level of quality education that I set out to do when
Freeport High School accessing these types of resources. becoming an educator.
Synchronous teaching (after September, things smoothed out a Having time to correct, call home, etc. I also would find it easier once the Ipad and Pencil comes in. Also making lessons Just trying things I did last year before lockdown with modifications. I hope it
Freeport High School bit!) more engaging having both groups in front of me. smoothes out.
I have tried so many of them. I try new things all the time, read articles about it, I am grateful that I'm synchronous, but there is,
share with colleagues, etc. Now, I feel like I need to slow down and do what I'm sadly, a lot missing . It's just not the same and I
I like seeing my students in person! I'm doing synchronous, so Managing synchronous teaching--how to include kids at home and kids in class, keeping lessons engaging for both groups, doing well. I need to find a pace and structure that is manageable for both students can't wait until we are back to normal. I miss it so
Freeport High School the pace is fast and we are doing a lot of meaningful work. not wasting any (precious!) class time, keeping up with grading--sooo much online grading, ouch. and myself so I can sustain teaching this way. much.
7

What building do you
spend most of your
time at? What has gone well so far since September? What have been your biggest challenges? What are your ideas for improvement? What are your other comments or concerns?
Continue communicating with parents about what
teachers ARE DOING each and every day to
support our students.
Share how teachers ARE making connections
and creating collaborations between our
students.
As a fully synchronous teacher, I can tell you that
it is A LOT of technology to be responsible for.
I've ordered quite a bit of equipment on my own
(with my personal money)in order teach
synchronously. With synchronous teaching, there
are so many buttons to push and windows to
keep track of. I am a very organized teacher who
is confident using and researching technology.
However, I empathize with teachers who are not
as comfortable with a variety of devices (or as
detailed-oriented). It is really hard to stay on
track with the scattered students.
Not having consistent tech support/someone
who can quickly come into a classroom to
problem-solve has been an issue.
Continue respecting teacher judgement in regards to PLD and PLC time. We all Thank you for being flexible in regards to parent-
have a lot on our plates and having the extra time to plan/catch-up on teacher conferences. It was SO MUCH better,
Technology. Getting students to log into the synchronous classes while at home. Having the time to actually plan and assessment/communicate with students and their parents is critical. Please do not sitting in my own house, without a mask, hosting
Freeport High School Being able to see the students process what is going on each and everyday. add any extra requirements/meetings. conferences.
Students not adhering to the social distancing
Freeport High School In class instruction. Having consistent attendance from remote and synchronous students. Make Fridays 1/2 day for all students whereby both cohorts can attend. protocols and CDC guidelines.
There is a huge amount of concern about district-
wide teacher burnout and how damaging this
could be to our students, schools, and
community. We don't want to hear that we're
going 10% above and beyond - that's probably
the most demoralizing thing we could hear right
now, especially since we feel like we're going
200% beyond with -500% results. This is made
worse because we constantly communicate with
colleagues in other districts who have that one
day a week to work remotely. If we could have
that resource, it would be so valued and help
address so many issues. It would also go a long
way towards helping us feel heard and
supported.
There is also the issue that more seems to be
decided by a few outspoken parents/guardians
than us educators. We are the ones who are
making the nearly impossible actually viable
each day, and we are the ones who can make
sure that individual kids are educated, supported,
and heard. However, we are the last to be asked
for ideas, feedback, and input, and we are
feeling increasingly that our perspective is not
We could move to the four-day-week model (like EVERYONE else seems to be valued. Please let US make decisions and
doing), as that time would do wonders for our ability to teach and support students. choices about how to TEACH through this
The additional day of in-building learning (and, let's face it, it's not really very pandemic. None of this is normal, and we are
productive) is not worth the mental fatigue we are experiencing, nor is it worth the doing the best we can right now, but it is not
frustration we feel when comparing our experiences to that of other districts. sustainable, nor will it help students if/when we
Students are missing the individual check-ins we were able to provide in the spring, all burn out by the end of the first
which means they are more likely to fall behind or feel unsupported. quarter/trimester.
The biggest challenges have been around TIME. We do not have the time required/needed for adapting/developing Another thing would be a moratorium on the initiatives that come with a "normal" Huge shout-out to Jen Gulko and Charlie Mellon.
curriculum, collaborating with colleagues, teaching classes, providing feedback and grading, connecting with students, and school year. We only see our students once a week, so why did we have to put We at the high school could not have gotten this
everything else. We are exhausted, and it is unclear what could possibly be sacrificed further - pedagogy, mental health, lower-grades, middle schoolers, freshmen, and sophomores through the fall NWEA far without them. We don't want to see such
The students have been good-humored and resilient. The family responsibilities, physical health, more? The biggest issue, too, is that the students end up being impacted by our lack for math and reading? If we're worried about student screen-time, why did we wonderful administrators burn out, either, so we
building administration has been very supportive as well. The of time, energy, attention, and more. When we as teachers experience increased strain, our work suffers, and our students require them to sit in front of a computer screen for 160 to 240 minutes last week for hope that they can get things taken off their
Freeport High School community has been appreciative. are our work, so their experience ends up suffering, too. standardized testing? grossly overloaded plates, too.
8

What building do you
spend most of your
time at? What has gone well so far since September? What have been your biggest challenges? What are your ideas for improvement? What are your other comments or concerns?
Learning the technology to do a synchronous class.
Understanding the schedule
Posting home assignments and keeping up with grading them.
Keeping up with late work submitted.
Following up with kids who are absent since I see them only once in class.
How to give summatives to remote kids.
Freeport High School It's been great to be back in school and seeing the students. Hard to get to know the students when you only see them once a week and they are wearing masks. Time for teachers to get organized and prep.
Freeport High School Administrative support Getting into a rhythm Keep on keeping on: keep trying new things to maximize time with students none
I am afraid some of my colleagues are getting
really discouraged and will leave the teaching
Everyone is flexible when there are changes to the schedule The current schedule is exhausting. I feel like I am being pulled in many directions profession. Please listen to teacher concerns
and issues with technology. All students are wearing masks Technology for synchronous classes- it doesn't always work as expected and I am still waiting for an iPad and Apple Pencil and it is hard to get anything done to my level of satisfaction. Can there be more and make sure we have the support needed to
Freeport High School without issue and wash their hands when asked. for activities and notes for my synchronous class. unstructured faculty meetings to work with colleagues? balance career and family needs.
I'm concerned and disappointed with the overall
lack of leadership, as well as some of the
careless remarks made by some members of our
school board (but most notably the board chair).
I've been watching these meetings EXTREMELY
closely since March 2020, and some of the
comments that have been made are (in my
opinion, entirely out of line, and in some
instances down right disrespectful.
I would happily invite any member of the school
board to shadow me in my classroom for a day,
or even just an hour. Please come see what our
school day has been like. You have to
understand that you are getting an EXTREMELY
**Quality, not quantity.** one-sided answer from the RSU5 Principals
Why are we one of the ONLY districts in our county that are not giving teachers one when they share their building report with the
* It is absolutely IMPOSSIBLE to social distance while in school. day a week dedicated to prepping & student check-ins? board. Their reports are not fully representing the
Is this only because of the complaints heard from the loudest parents? reality of how the school day is going in their
* There is a huge discrepancy between the work that admin/school board members THINK teachers are being asked to do, Why are we placing the complaints of parents above the necessities of the schools. And I'm not even sure how they could,
and the ACTUAL amount of work teachers have to do this year. teachers? because I've seen very little of our school's
Why are we more concerned with the number of days students are in class, when it Principal/Assistant
* I'm having to develop an entirely different curriculum this year for quite a few of my classes, due to the restrictions very clearly means that quality of those classes will be worse? Principal/Superintendent/Assistant
Freeport High School I haven't contracted the Coronavirus, yet. (knock on wood!) implemented by COVID-19 and the Maine DOE/CDC. What do you think separates RSU5 from any other school district in our county? Superintendent this year.
Juggling personal and professional duties, all
while adapting and evolving to what the next
thing is. I also think that as the school year
progresses, procedures will relax, individuals
If I'm being honest, I think having meaningful teacher involvement would be ideal. At may be less careful and we may have more
Managing new expectations in an ever-changing landscape. It's nice to get positive feedback like "teachers are working so times it feels like when teachers are involved, a decision has already been made outbreaks. I am concerned about in uptick of
Being able to see students in person and have some in-person hard and have so much on their plate" but then in the next breath, they need to do more, everyone is making sacrifices, the and that teacher involvement is more of a formality. In my opinion inclusion in a cases and the potental for a higher risk staff
instruction. The custodians have worked very hard cleaning. implication from some community members and others is that teachers need to suck it up and work harder and do more, process that you don't have the power to change the predetermined course of member to get sick.
Freeport High School Educators working extra hard to adapt. which is incredibly unfair. action, can feel disingenuous.
I think it is going OK for what it is. I do not feel
Get kid cell phone numbers - then have a way for guidance and social work to that it will be safe to go green. I am concerned
connect with the most struggling kids by texting through google voice. Kids seem about the struggling remote kids - some of my
more inclined to respond to texts. Administrative assistants could be trained in how remote kids were already some of my most at
Only one student had confirmed Covid - and it seemingly did I cannot meet with kids in my office - that is a challenge. We do not have many spaces to take kids either. Getting kids to to create remote schedules. There should be more people assigned to remote risk kids. I still have a concern about how to
not spread. Students have been able to be in school 2-3 days a respond on email is not always easy. Creating remote plans were super challenging. There have been more balls in the air learners and more support for the remote kids. We also need to have more mental safely meet kids over the winter. Can you add a
Freeport High School week to connect with teachers and peers. than ever and trying to keep track of all of the balls has not been easy. health and social emotional supports. HEPA filter to the main guidance office area?
I am concerned that the voice of teachers are not
being heard in decisions about how to best
educate students in this pandemic situation. I
feel like parents and school board have the only
voice being heard by administration. I feel like
the message I am hearing as a teacher from
administration is that " we know you are working
incredibly hard, but do more and do better"
Teachers are the ones that are day to day
dealing with all of these struggles and challenges
of teaching, but first and foremost trying to keep
our students, our faculty and ourselves safe. I
have been an educator for MANY years and am
struggling to manage all that is been required of
Only 1 situation of COVID in the district. Having kids back in Managing both in person classes and remote students activities, lessons and grading simultaneously. Continue with the yellow plan that exists and allow teachers the time to make it as me. Please include us in the process of decision
Freeport High School school is positive. effective as possible. making and listen to what we have to share.
9

What building do you
spend most of your
time at? What has gone well so far since September? What have been your biggest challenges? What are your ideas for improvement? What are your other comments or concerns?
Most of the teachers in the school are working
very hard, many more hours than contracted,
and yet the message we are hearing is that
parents aren't satisfied with the results, and that
we need more live contact, etc. etc. It would be
nice to hear that what we are doing has the
support of the community. I haven't seen a single
person in the building who isn't trying very hard
to be the best possible support for students.
We are in the "Yellow" plan not because it is
what we all prefer, but because it is the only safe
option that our building and staff can currently
accommodate. We can't really safely fit the
student body in the building and "go green" per
CDC guidelines. The space might exist in theory,
but in practice, we will not be following the
guidelines. It has continually been phrased to the
FHS faculty that "if we're going to stand behind
- New technology to help with instruction isn't always available (speakers/microphone system hasn't been installed in some the Yellow plan, we need to do better." Many of
rooms yet) us don't see us as "standing behind" the Yellow
- The schedule is burdensome (rotating Friday doesn't make good logistical sense) plan, but rather the Yellow plan being the only
- Students are mostly happy to be back in school - Students are doing the best they can to obey guidelines, but they are not very successful at social distancing in the space - Changing the schedule viable way to have students in the building and
- Teachers are happy to see students we have, and many of them immediately ignore the guidelines when they leave school. - Hiring additional technology support to finish installing new technology come remotely close to following CDC guidelines
Freeport High School - I'm thrilled to be more connected with students/colleagues - Planning everything on the fly for brand new modes of instruction is intense and hard to manage - Emphasizing distancing habits outside of school (which are out of our hands).
Creating multiple lessons where we would typically only have one on a topic (one for in person, one for remote learners etc.)
This is time consuming on top of all the other new tasks we have to do this year.
Interfacing with ALL students in a synchronous class-This entails running a Zoom call with students online AND also being
present with students in the classroom at the same time while sharing my computer screen AND projecting that computer
screen so everyone can see what I am writing. My ability to interact with all students like this is challenging because you are
constantly redirecting your attention to a different place. I'm checking/sending email, too, when tech fails. We know multi-
tasking is inefficient and this is the definition of it! I am mentally exhausted at the end of the day because my brain has had to It would be wonderful to have one day a week where students could check in
assess and monitor and make so many decisions that are not typical of a teacher. remotely (getting more facetime with teachers) but teachers were not required to
push out new assignments or hold classes with actual lessons (but could opt to
When we had teachers out on quarantine (9 teachers!-for one student who tested positive) the remaining building staff were have lessons if they wished). Many districts are hosting one remote day a week with
The mask wearing! I thought this would be difficult to police, but covering classes during prep periods because we didn't have enough subs. While this worked as a short-term solution, it these kind of expectations. I'm only suggesting this at the high school level-it would
most people recognize that if we want to continue having won't be feasible multiple weeks in a row, or if more teachers are out of the building due to multiple cases. not have to be district-wide. For example, use Fridays for this remote check-in and
athletics and be in school, even hybrid, that this has to happen. have an abbreviated schedule so each class meets.
I recognize that parents are grateful we are back in school and have gratitude for it, but unless you can see what is
Being able to be in the school building. My science materials happening behind the scenes, you may not realize what a toll this is taking on the staff. In fact, because things are going so We need to reimagine the idea that in-person teaching is ALWAYS superior to
are here, and it is much easier to do labs and demonstrations well, we are expected to do more, have more synchronous classes and I worry that this will come at the expense of the remote teaching. While in-person instruction may be preferred, you can do quality
with access to them. staff's mental health. We put on a happy face, because we are cheerleaders. But, so many are fraying around the edges and instruction remotely. Just because a student is sitting in a chair in a classroom, it
feeling immense pressure and sacrificing time for self-care, time with family, and sleep. Every week, I work with 104 different doesn't mean they are engaged. I wish we had more time to work on our practice in From a staff perspective, it often feels like
Seeing students and staff in person. There are no tech issues students. That is a large number, when you think about potential exposure. For this reason, and their protection, I have seen the hybrid model, before the expectations on teachers are changed abruptly, again. parents are getting surveyed more than staff are
when they are right in front of you. my own parents and siblings sparingly since the start of school. They don't want to be exposed to the same germs and or that their responses hold more weight than
viruses that I could potentially be harboring. I don't have the luxury of working from home, or even working with a smaller I wish that we had the opportunity to practice our "red plan" schedule before we are ours do. We are also stakeholders who want our
Having concrete expectations for student online presence. In number of students. When I do see family, I wear a mask and try to stay outside. I wish that people recognized the sacrifices thrown into it like we were in the spring. We have adjusted our expectations and voices heard.
the spring, even virtual meetings were voluntary, so students that we are making, because we are teachers. We want to work with our students, and we know how nice it is to visit in students should have the opportunity to see what it looks like, and give feedback on
would opt out of them. Now that they are tied to attendance, person with people. When we asked for a slight modification to the schedule, to be remote the two days before Thanksgiving what we might want to change before we get locked into it for a longer period of Thank you for seeking out our feedback directly
Freeport High School students are taking virtual/remote meetings more seriously. and December break, so that we might be able to see family and get tested before that happens, we were shot down. time. via this survey.
The ever changing rules provided by both the district administration and the principals. Our early prof develop days were
designed with the Green Model in Mind. (Why green - that is normal - that is what we already do). Proactive administration
would have told us to work on yellow hybrid and red plans. That is what other districts were doing.
Our Second professional development (after the Positive Cases in district) were again not geared toward a yellow plus or red
plan. For some teachers - syncronous was not in the picture and we were told by our principal that we would be able to
chose. Now we are told as of (Oct 21) that we will go syncronous it is not a choice. OK - well this is a new platform for some
of us. We have heard from both syncronous teachers and students that this platform is not always reliable. Teachers
struggle with the technology and engaging two sets of students (one in front of them and one at home). Who do I concentrate
on? My inclass students have said they feel left out when the teacher starts working with the online students and vice versa.
For the past several days I have quickly poled my students about how they feel about going syncronous. Most like the We need teachers and our tech staff working together to determine how best to
My colleagues have been supportive. We struggle through the present system with a choice if you want syncronous and some are doing that. Where is student and teacher voice in proceed with a syncronous platform. We need to have the administrators stop trying Trust your teachers. We are on the front lines.
added work load but know that we teachers/ed techs are here this??? Our leadership teams are VOICING, but it is not getting us a chair at the " REAL" decision making meeting. to force direction (it may not be the best for students). If you truly believe we are "Working Hard" (and
to listen or provide a virtual hug when our colleagues come to most of us are working harder than we ever
us in tears. (yes we have faculty -new and old in tears). The Our newest biggest challenge is going syncronous when we have not developed and looked at any RSU5 data, to indicate Give us a chance to get competent with one plan before starting another or adding have), then stop asking for more before we have
kids have been great and it's wonderful to see them in and out what is needed. We are listening to the most vocal parents , but are we listening to our students and teachers. Teachers to it. I am tired of hearing we know you are working hard, but if you rethink this you even caught our breath. Thanks and I hope you
of our classrooms. The custodial staff rocks and they are doing and students are on the front line. Let us determine how to best proceed with this new platform. Give us a chance to can work harder. It's now a joke at the high school. WE KNOW YOU ARE will listen to your staff. We really love our kids
Freeport High School great work at keepiing things clean. breathe! WORKING HARD, BUT WE NEED YOU TO WORK HARDER. and will always do what is best for them.
10