SOURCE: https://www.rsu5.org/fs/resource-manager/view/5be044f3-b9d1-4759-9e35-eb1ceb9066e8
SECTION: /board-of-directors-and-policies/board-agendas-and-minutes/agendas
TITLE: February 6, 2019
TYPE: Finalsite-PDF
============================================================

P
rogram of Studies Overview
​
Introduction
The Freeport High School Program of Studies presents information about the courses offered at the
school. Students should use this book as they plan an appropriate academic program. Please recognize
that these courses are possible offerings for the coming year. A variety of factors, including the number of
students enrolled in a given course, will determine whether it is offered or not.
The Freeport High School Program of Studies also provides information about our Student Services
Department, its role in your student’s education, and the department’s processes associated with course
registration. Other support services are described as well. Graduation requirements for current and future
Freeport High School students are fully explained.
DISCLAIMER: Subsequent to publication of this catalog, Freeport High School reserves the right
to make changes in courses, program requirements, policy and regulations as circumstances,
funding, and enrollment dictate. There is no guarantee that any course listed in this catalog will be
offered in any given semester. The ongoing work of aligning the curriculum with the Maine
Standards will, of necessity, result in changes in course content. Students and parents will be
informed if changes in course content create a significant difference between the course descriptions
as it appears in this Program of Studies and the revised course content.
1
Table of Contents



C
ore Values and Beliefs
​
Mission:
​
Freeport High School is committed to integrity, community, perseverance, and creativity. We celebrate
individuality and empower students to achieve their highest personal aspirations in the pursuit of
excellence.
Values:
We value Integrity
​
● Those with integrity treat others and themselves with respect, honesty, kindness, and fairness.
We value Community
​
● Those who value community embrace relationships, celebrate diversity, display empathy, and
nurture well-being
We value Perseverance
​
● Those who persevere take ownership of their learning, embrace challenge, and aspire to achieve
their potential in the face of difficulties.
We value Creativity
​
● Those who are creative engage their world with a spirit of curiosity, take risks, and approach
problem solving in innovative ways.
Beliefs about learning: We are...
Learner-centered
● We believe that when we take responsibility for our learning, we are empowered to become
collaborative learners who are proficient at seeking support and are self-directed.
Critical thinkers
● We believe that when we examine a problem or challenge from multiple perspectives with an
open mind and a questioning spirit, we are able to enrich our understanding of the world.
Effective communicators
● We believe that when we articulate our thoughts and listen actively, we are able to effectively
engage others, collaborate within our community, and reflect on our strengths and weaknesses.
Problem solvers
● We believe that when we take initiative, use a variety of approaches and strategies, and learn
from both our successes and failures, we are able to solve complex and important problems.
2
Table of Contents

A
ccreditation
​
Freeport High School is accredited by the New England Association of Schools and Colleges, Inc., a
non-governmental, nationally recognized organization whose affiliated institutions include elementary
schools through collegiate institutions offering postgraduate instruction.
Accreditation of an institution by the NEASC indicates that it meets or exceeds criteria for the assessment
of institutional quality periodically applied through a peer group review process. An accredited school or
college is one which has available the necessary resources to achieve its stated purposes through
appropriate educational programs, is substantially doing so, and gives reasonable evidence that it will
continue to do so in the foreseeable future. Institutional integrity is also addressed through accreditation.
Accreditation by the New England Association is not partial but applies to the institution as a whole. As
such, it is not a guarantee of the quality of every course or program offered, or the competence of
individual graduates. Rather, it provides reasonable assurance about the quality of opportunities available
to students who attend the institution.
Inquiries regarding the status of an institution’s accreditation by the New England Association should be
directed to the administrative staff of Freeport High School.
3
Table of Contents

T
able of Contents
​
School Contact/Directory………………………………………………………………….… page 5
​
Letter from the Principal………………………………………………………………….… page 6
​
School Profile…………………………………………………………………………………..pages 7-9
​
Graduation Requirements………………………………..................................…………….. pages 10-13
​
Guiding Principles................................................................…………………………………. pages 14-15
​
Guidance Department……………………………………………………………………….. page 16
​
Post-Secondary Planning: Possible Pathways…………………………………….................page 17
​
Academic Support………………………………………………………………….……….....pages 18-19
​
Additional Support Services………………………..………………………………….…..… pages 20-21
​
Grading System…………………………………………………….……………………….…page 22-23
​
Registration Process……………………………………………………………..….…………pages 24-25
​
Course Planning & Sequencing………………………………………………..….…………. pages 26-27
​
Course Add/Drop………………………………………………………..………….………… page 28
​
Course Catalog………………………………………………………………..…….………… page 29-59
​
English Department Course Offerings……………………………………..…….…………. pages 29-32
​
Health & Physical Education Course Offerings……………………………………..…….. pages 33-35
​
Mathematics Department Course Offerings……………………………………..…….…… pages 36-39
​
Science & Technology Department Course Offerings……………………………………... pages 40-43
​
Social Studies Department Course Offerings………………………………….…..…….… pages 44-47
​
Visual and Performing Arts Department Course Offerings……………………………… pages 48-54
​
Musical Arts……………………………………..…….………………….………... pages 48-49
​
Theatre Arts……………………………………..…….………………….………... page 50
​
Visual Arts……………………………………..…….…………………..…………. pages 51-53
​
Media Arts……………………………………..…….……….………….…………. page 54
​
World Languages Department Course Offerings……………………………………..…….pages 55-57
​
Additional Academic Opportunities………………………………….…..…….…………… pages 58-60
​
Region Ten Technical High School……………………………………………...….………...pages 61-64
​
Extracu rricular Clubs and Activities……………………………………..…….……………page 65
​
Athletics……………………………………..…….………………….……………………….. page 66
​
At-A-Glance Course Index……………………………………..…….……………….….….. pages 67-74
​
4
Table of Contents

C
ontact Information
​
SCHOOL & DISTRICT NUMBERS
Freeport High School Main Office 865-4706
Region 10 Technical High School 729-6622
Freeport High School Instructional Support Services 865-2856
Ms. Becky Foley, Superintendent’s Office 865-0928, x5
ADMINISTRATION - 865-4706
Ms. Jen Gulko, Principal x224
Mr. Charlie Mellon, Assistant Principal x223
Mr. Craig Sickles, Athletic Director x228
SCHOOL COUNSELING & SUPPORT TEAM - 865-4706
High School Counseling Office x305
Ms. Alexis Rog, Counselor x306
Ms. Dana Clark, Counselor & Chair x304
Ms. Liz Peirce, Counselor x303
Ms. Margarete Schnauck, School Social Worker x253
Ms. Emily Guyer, School Nurse x200
5
Table of Contents

P
rincipal’s Letter
​
The Freeport Program of Studies is intended to provide both parents and students an overview of
Freeport High School’s academic expectations and an understanding of the various other
programs and supports available to students to promote success during their high school careers.
Freeport High School is a school community that prides itself on building strong relationships
with students and preparing them for high levels of success in college and/or careers after high
school. We are dedicated to pushing our students to become critical thinkers, creative
problem-solvers, perseverant learners and positive community members.
Our Core Values and Beliefs rest on the foundation that all students should be held to high
standards for learning, should be clear about what they are expected to learn, and should be given
regular feedback about their progress toward those standards as well as continuous support. We
provide opportunities for students to demonstrate the skills and knowledge that will support them
in reaching high levels of success in our ever-changing 21st century world and workplace. Our
​
faculty is working diligently to continue to implement, reflect on and refine instructional
​
practices that will support our students in reaching high levels of academic and personal success.
As we move into the 2019-2020 school year, we will continue to work to support the students of
Freeport, Durham and Pownal both in and out of the classroom. We will strive to provide a
challenging academic experience while encouraging our students to persevere and succeed. We
look forward to welcoming new members of our Freeport High School student body and
community.
Sincerely,
Jen Gulko, Principal Charlie Mellon, Assistant Principal
6
Table of Contents

School Profile 2018 - 2019
COMMUNITY SCHOOL
Freeport High School is focused on guiding students to explore and Accreditation: New England Association of
​
achieve their greatest potential across academics, athletics, and the arts Schools and Colleges
in an environment emphasizing social awareness and compassion. Our
Total enrollment: 590
graduates reflect this adventurous, inclusive and challenging spirit, and ​
Total Senior class: 153
are engaged citizens with a sense of responsibility and community. ​
Special Education: 10.9%
​
Our students benefit from their close-knit community and values. We are Free and Reduced Lunch: 21.4%
​
fortunate to be in a beautiful area of Maine and the home of L.L. Bean. Our school is built from the communities of
We are an international tourism and retail powerhouse annually hosting Pownal, Durham and Freeport, Maine.
over 400 times our resident population in visitors. Employment is plentiful Freeport High School regularly scores in the
in the service industry, and many of our students grow up developing the top 10% of all Maine high schools on
grit and determination that can be built by having a challenging job while standardized tests, but we encourage our
also tuning their interpersonal skills with visitors to our community from students to look beyond those numbers and
all over the globe. create and embrace their own learning
goals.
CURRICULUM GRADUATION REQUIREMENTS
24 Credits Total
Freeport High School is one of Maine’s leaders in transitioning to a
proficiency-based curriculum. The class of 2021 will be the first to earn a
English 4
proficiency-based diploma. We emphasize engagement and learning over
seat-time and encourage students to explore their own directions, but do
Math 4
so in a manner that ensures a student masters the critical concepts
outlined in Maine’s Learning Results. Social Studies 3
Freeport High School offers Advanced Placement (AP), Honors (H), and
Science and Technology 4
college preparatory level classes. As a function of the small size of our
school and the scheduling challenges that sometimes presents, it is not World Language 1
possible for a student to take all the AP courses offered in any given year.
Visual and Performing Arts 1
However, all students are provided with laptops and have access to
Virtual High School (VHS) and other online courses at all levels, including
Health .5
AP.
* Additional Courses are offered through: Maine Region Ten Technical Physical Education 1
​
High School, Morse Street Early Pre-Apprenticeship, JMG (Jobs for Maine
Electives 5.5
Graduates) PLATO, Virtual High School, Work Study, AP4ALL
7
Table of Contents

HONORS COURSES
ENGLISH MATHEMATICS SCIENCE SOCIAL STUDIES VISUAL + PERFORMING
ARTS
AP Language & Calculus AB Biology World History Studio Art
Composition Calculus BC Environ. Science American History Art History
Literature & Statistics Physics C: Mechanics Music Theory
Composition
HONORS English 9 Geometry Earth Systems Science Humanities/Western Studies Foundation of Art
English 10 Algebra I Biology Global Studies Chamber Choir
English 11 Algebra II Chemistry Economics
Pre-Calculus
POST SECONDARY PLANS: CLASS OF 2018 ASSESSMENT GRADE
112
Students
​
60%
​ ​
4-Year College
AP DATA
16%
2-Year College
​ ​ 69%
213 SCORE 3 OR ABOVE:
EXAMS ​
​​
3 50 Students
​
102
4 38 Students
20% ​
Employment 5 16 Students
​ ​ STUDENTS ​
2%
​ ​
GAP Year
2%
Armed Forces
​ ​
8
Table of Contents

GRADING SCALE GRADE POINT AVERAGE
Grade Grade Pt. Value Grade Value
A 93-100 H Honors
B 85-92 HP High Pass
C 77-84 P Pass
D 70-76 W Withdrew
F 0-69 F Fail
NC No Credit
Honor Roll:
High Honors = All grades 93 or above
Honors = All Grades 85 or above
Beginning with the Class of 2000, Freeport High School will not
report rank in class. Freeport designates summa cum laude with
distinction (96-100), summa cum laude (93-100), magna cum laude
(89-92), cum laude (85-88) and rounds to the nearest whole number.
COLLEGES
9
Table of Contents

G
raduation Requirements
​
Before entering high school, students need to know the standards for attaining a high school diploma in
order to plan an appropriate, sequential, educational program to meet that goal.
The Superintendent, through the high school principal or other designee, shall be responsible for making
accurate information concerning diploma requirements available to incoming students and their parents
prior to the start of their ninth grade school year. A copy of this policy will be disseminated to all
incoming ninth grade students at the time of course selection. This policy will also be included in every
edition of the high school student handbook and Program of Studies.
The School Board has approved the following schedule of minimum requirements for graduation, which
includes minimum requirements specified by the State of Maine. The Board is aware that current law and
regulations are subject to change.
The School Board expects the Superintendent/designee to inform students and parents as soon as
practicable of any additional State-imposed standards that must be met before students may be awarded a
high school diploma.
DIPLOMA REQUIREMENTS FOR STUDENTS
As a minimum for graduation from high school, must have completed successfully a total of 24 one-year
course equivalents (credits) at the secondary level (grades 9 through 12).
High School Graduation Requirements for Freeport High School
Graduation Requirements: 24 required credits to earn diploma
1. English Language Arts (4 credits)
​
2. Math (4 credits)
​
3. Science and Technology (4 credits)
​
4. Social Studies (3 credits)
​
5. Physical Education (1 credit) and Health (.5 credit)
​ ​ ​
6. Visual and Performing Arts (1 credit)
​
7. World Languages (1 credit)
​
8. Electives (5.5 credits)
​
Twelve and one-half (12 1⁄2) required credits are specified by the State of Maine. They are:
A. English - 4 credits;
B. Social Studies and History, including one year of American History and Government - 2 credits;
C. Mathematics - 2 credits;
D. Science, including at least one year of laboratory science- 2 credits
10
Table of Contents

E. Visual & Performing Arts, which may include art, music, or drama - 1 credit;
F. Health - 1/2 credit; and
G. Physical Education - 1 credit.
​
In addition, the Board requires the following eleven and one-half (11 1⁄2) credits:
A. Five and one half elective credits – 5.5 credits
B. An additional one year of social studies – 1 credit;
C. Two additional years of math – 2 credits;
D. Two additional years of science – 2 credits;
E. Level 1 & Level 2 PE Class
F. One year of a world language – 1 credit;
Elective credits may be selected by the student based upon the student's’ interests, abilities, and the
requirements of the field that the student plans to enter upon graduation.
In order for a student to participate in graduation, the student must have successfully completed all of the
above-listed requirements.
Minimum Enrollment for All Students
Each Freeport High School student is required to enroll in an academic program which totals a minimum
of 6 credits each year. However, it is recommended that each student enrolls in 7 classes per year.
Alternative Means of Earning Credits
A student who is deficient in these requirements or wishes to meet these requirements through alternative
means may earn and apply credits toward graduation in accordance with the provisions of this section.
A student who wishes to meet a credit requirement through an alternative method must have prior written
approval as specified through this section. A student may earn credits with prior written approval from
his/her guidance counselor and the high school principal as follows:
● Early college/dual enrollment courses
● Career and technical education programming
● Online/virtual learning for credit recovery and/or courses not offered at FHS
● Apprenticeships, internships and/or field work
● Community service
● Exchange programs
● Independent study
● Alternative education/“At Risk” programming
● Adult education
● Summer school courses
● Other academic program approved by the High School Guidance and
Administration.
Each pathway must provide a quality learning experience comparable in rigor to the school unit’s own
course offerings.
A student who has failed a course in the above-listed requirements may, with prior approval, receive
credit for that course through a successful completion of a postgraduate course, a state approved Adult
11
Table of Contents

Education course(s) or a state-approved summer school program. Credit for a marked course may also be
received for a correspondence course approved by the High School Principal in advance of registration.
The student may participate in the next regular graduation ceremony following successful completion of
the requirements.
A student who is granted early admission to an accredited college or university may use college
coursework for graduation and may thereby graduate with his/her class upon successful completion of the
course(s) needed for graduation if he/she requests and is granted permission from the high school
principal to do so. A course being used to meet high school graduation requirements must meet minimum
high school contact hour requirements and the high school’s course outcome requirements.
Students following a traditional pathway must be enrolled in the equivalent of at least 6 full year courses
in each of their high school years unless redefined through a personal learning plan, PLP, approved by
both the high school guidance department and administration.
STUDENTS RECEIVING SPECIAL EDUCATION SERVICES
A student with a disability, as identified in 20-A MRSA §7001(1-B), who achieves proficiency as
required in 20-A MRSA §4722-A(1), as specified by the goals and objectives of the student’s
individualized education plan (IEP)will be awarded a diploma.
INFORMING STUDENTS AND PARENTS
The Superintendent/designee will inform students and parents as soon as practicable of any State-
imposed proficiency standards/requirements that must be met before students may be awarded a high
school diploma, but prior to the start of the class cohort’s 9th grade school year.
ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS APPLICABLE TO THE AWARDING OF A DIPLOMA
FROM FREEPORT HIGH SCHOOL
This section applies to all students, in all graduation classes.
A.Transfer Students
For students who transfer to Freeport High School from another state or from an educational program
that is not required to be aligned with the content standards and Guiding Principles of the system of
Learning Results, the Freeport High School Principal and Guidance Department shall determine the
value of the student’s prior educational experience towards meeting graduation requirements.
B. Home-schooled Students
For previously home-schooled students wishing to receive a diploma from Freeport High School, the
Freeport High School Principal and Guidance Department shall determine the value of the student’s
prior educational experience toward meeting graduation requirements.
C. Delayed Awarding of Diplomas
12
Table of Contents

A student who leaves Freeport High School to attend an accredited, degree-granting institution of
higher education may upon satisfactory completion of the freshman year be awarded a high school
diploma, provided that the student has notified the principal at the time of the early admission.
D.Early Awarding of Diplomas
A student who has met the State’s and the School Board’s diploma requirements in fewer than four
years of high school will be awarded a diploma.
E. Extended Study
Students are eligible for extended years of study to complete the requirements of a diploma if they
have not reached the age of 20 at the start of the school year. Students eligible for extended years of
study may be referred to adult education or other resources suitable to young learners. Extended study
for students with disabilities shall be specified in the student’s Individualized Education Plan.
F. Certificate of Completion
The School Board may provide a certificate of completion to a student who leaves school having
completed four years attendance as a full-time high school student who has earned/completed the
required credits or courses/learning experiences but has not met Learning Results proficiency
standards that may be mandated by the State.
G.Participation in Graduation Ceremony
A student must complete all School Board requirements for a high school diploma or certificate of
completion in order to participate in graduation exercises.
H.Honors and Awards at Graduation
Student academic achievements will be grouped within numerical bands and utilized to identify,
report and reward individual accomplishments for purposes of graduation. These bands will include
three Honor Bands which will identify those graduating seniors who at the end of the 7th semester
have a Grade Point Average of:
Summa Cum Laude (with highest honors): a minimum GPA of 3.75
Magna Cum Laude (with great honors): a minimum GPA of 3.50
Cum Laude (with honors): a minimum GPA of 3.25
13
Table of Contents

G
uiding Principles
​
The Guiding Principles are a set of “cross curricular skills” that must be taught and demonstrated by all
students to best ensure that ALL students are career and college ready. We fundamentally believe that
​ ​
these principles should be the foundation of our educational program and, therefore, these principles will
be introduced and incorporated in various learning experiences.
The Guiding Principles state that each Maine student must leave school as:
A. A clear and effective communicator who:
● Demonstrates organized and purposeful communication in English and at least one other
language
● Uses evidence and logic appropriately in communication
● Adjusts communication based on the audience
● Uses a variety of modes of expression (spoken, written and visual and performing including the
use of technology to create and share the expressions)
B. A self-directed and lifelong learner who:
● Recognizes the need for information and locates and evaluates resources
● Applies knowledge to set goals and make informed decisions
● Applies knowledge in new contexts
● Demonstrates initiative and independence
● Demonstrates flexibility including the ability to learn, unlearn and relearn
● Demonstrates reliability and concern for quality
● Uses interpersonal skills to learn and work with individuals from diverse backgrounds
C. A creative and practical problem solver who:
● Observes and evaluates situations to define problems
● Frames questions, makes predictions and designs data/information collection and analysis
strategies
● Identifies patterns, trends and relationships that apply to solutions
● Generates a variety of solutions, builds a case for a best response and critically evaluates the
effectiveness of the response
● Sees opportunities, finds resources and seeks results
● Uses information and technology to solve problems
● Perseveres in challenging situations
D. A responsible and involved citizen who:
● Participates positively in the community and designs creative solutions to meet human needs and
wants
14
Table of Contents

● Accepts responsibility for personal decisions and actions
● Demonstrates ethical behavior and the moral courage to sustain it
● Understands and respects diversity
● Displays global awareness and economic and civic literacy
● Demonstrates awareness of personal and community health and wellness
E. An integrative and informed thinker who:
● Gains and applies knowledge across disciplines and learning contexts and to real-life situations
with and without technology
● Evaluates and synthesizes information from multiple sources
● Applies ideas across disciplines
● Applies systems thinking to understand the interaction and influence of related parts on each
other and on outcomes
15
Table of Contents

G
uidance Department
​
Office of Student Services
The purpose of the Student Services Program is to actively promote the academic, emotional, and social
development of all students in ninth through twelfth grades. As an integral part of the total educational
program, developmental student services builds on the resources of an excellent faculty, positive
parent-school relationships, and a supportive community. The Office of Student Services provides
direction for positive academic, extracurricular, and vocational outcomes for all students.
A developmental and preventive approach that enhances personal well-being and self-esteem has been
designed with the understanding that it is both a process and a program. Learning experiences are
provided which foster lifelong skills and attitudes necessary for high achievement, personal self-worth,
and respect for the earth and its inhabitants.
Student Service Goals
● To provide students with services responsive to their academic, social, and emotional needs
● To enable students to learn about themselves and their relationships with others
● To coordinate with the overall school program
● To develop career awareness, academic options, and life-planning skills
● To form relationships with community agencies
● To promote early intervention and continued services for identified at-risk students
● To prepare students to apply to college, technical/vocational school, or other program
Guidance Counselor Assignments
Students in grades 9-12 are assigned to guidance counselors by last name:
A-F: Mrs. Dana Clark
G-M: Mrs. Liz Peirce
N-Z: Mrs. Alexis Rog
16
Table of Contents

P
ost-secondary planning
​
If post-secondary education is desired, admission recommendations should be strongly
considered when planning the high school program. Since these recommendations vary greatly
among post-secondary schools, the best source of information is the individual college or
university website. Students should view the websites of a broad range of colleges they are
considering to make sure that they are covering the requirements. Additional reference books are
available in the Guidance Office and local bookstores.
Serious consideration is given by college admission representatives and by employers to
character, personality, work experience, and extracurricular activities. Most colleges prefer that
students pursue more challenging courses during their senior year.
FOUR-YEAR SCHOOLS HIGHLY SELECTIVE SCHOOLS
4 years of English 4 years of English
3 years of Mathematics 4 years of Mathematics
2-3 years of Laboratory Science 3-4 years of Laboratory Science
2-3 years of Social Studies 3-4 years of Social Studies
2 years of World Language 3-4 years of World Language
*Honors and Advanced Placement Courses
are strongly encouraged for most schools
TWO-YEAR PUBLIC AND PRIVATE SCHOOLS
Associate degree program recommendations vary widely, from needing a high school diploma
to satisfying recommendations similar to four-year schools.
Transfer programs usually require the same subjects as four-year schools.
VOCATIONAL SCHOOLS TECHNICAL SCHOOLS
4 years of English Recommendations differ widely. Some may
2-4 years of Mathematics include a high school diploma and physics
1-2 years of Laboratory Science plus four years of mathematics.
17
Table of Contents

A
cademic Support
​
Interventions
FHS has instituted interventions designed to ensure all students can meet increasingly rigorous academic
standards and feel supported in doing so. Some interventions are designed to increase the basic skills
necessary to succeed in a range of courses, while others are set up to create additional time and instruction
so that lessons are reinforced and extra practice moves all students toward meeting all standards.
Math and Writing Centers
​​
The Math and Writing Centers works with students at all levels of ability. Students are assisted
individually in various writing and math tasks. Teachers assigned to the Writing Center work with
students on assignments from all disciplines and keep copies of running assignments to maintain clarity in
directives to students. Similarly, teachers assigned to the Math Center work with students on problem sets
assigned by the students’ classroom teachers as well as remediate skills and help students prepare for
upcoming assessments. Students can schedule appointments in the Writing and Math Centers and are also
able to come in on an impromptu, drop-in basis if time is available. Students may also be assigned by a
classroom teacher or school counselor when it has been deemed that the student requires extra support.
Callback System
The Freeport High School Callback System takes place during our advisory period on one, two or three
days of the week (depending on other scheduled events during advisory). The purpose of this program is
to ensure that all students have time built into their schedules to receive targeted support in all content
areas as well as enrichment opportunities. We have developed a system where each teacher is able to
“call back” students that they need to see during this period. A teacher may call back a student for a
number of reasons, such as:
● Additional and targeted academic instruction
● Review of work with student
● Opportunity for making up missing/absent work
● Work on/complete an assignment
Teachers select students online at the start of the week and students receive an email from the teacher that
states the day they are to meet with the teacher and the reason the student has been called back. Attending
a callback session is not optional; students are required to meet with this teacher. In addition to working
with a particular teacher, we offer enrichment opportunities for students. These may include participating
in a Student Summit to discuss a school policy, working with guidance counselors to build skills in using
the Naviance program, or attending a presentation about a particular program such as City Term or the
Peace Corps. Students who are not called back on a particular day remain in their advisory with their
advisor and have an opportunity to work on school assignments.
18
Table of Contents

Guided Study Halls
Purpose: To create a more focused, supportive and personal environment for students during the study
​​
hall period.
Placement/Enrollment:
● 9th grade students are almost always placed in guided study halls. Placement of students in
grades 10-12 depends on space availability and grades.
● Any student (or parent of a student) in a general study hall can request to be placed in a guided
study hall if there is space and the student is looking for a more structured study hall
environment.
● Students are placed in the guided study hall for a minimum of one quarter.
● Students are placed in a guided study hall for either a half period or a full period, depending on
their schedules
Response to Intervention (RTI) and SAT (Student Assistance Team)
Utilizing a variety of strategies and approaches, FHS strives to meet the needs of all learners. It is
essential that FHS has an approach that employs a system of supports that provides each student an
opportunity for both behavioral and academic success. The development of personalized academic plans
for struggling students is pivotal. These services vary in complexity based on need. The goal is to
support students in reaching academic and personal success including their grades, attendance and
behavior. Students are referred to the SAT team and to administration for potential implementation of
individualized interventions based on current academic and personal progress.
Gifted and Talented Services
Identified Gifted and Talented students at the High School level are on a consultation basis. Students will
meet with the GT teacher to determine level of services needed to ensure for academic success. Students
may opt to meet with the GT teacher to discuss college exploration, other outside opportunities, ways to
advocate for their education, etc. The GT teacher is available for appointments via email. The GT teacher
also consults with classroom teachers to help assist in differentiating for the GT learner's needs.
19
Table of Contents

A
dditional Support Services
​
Advisor/Advisee Program
Although FHS is a small school, it has a diverse student body with a great variety of needs: intellectual,
emotional, and social. The school offers a strong curriculum and many co-curricular activities. To
complement these aspects of school life and to ensure all students’ growth and learning, the faculty and
administration want to provide a strong support network for each individual student to help develop
interpersonal skills. Each student will benefit from having a contact person, an advisor, who is responsible
for helping him or her manage the multiple demands on time and energy.
The FHS Advisor/Advisee Program provides communication and support among students, staff and
parents through individual and group meetings. All advisors in the program are committed to helping
students:
● Understand themselves and others better
● Identify their interests and abilities
● Participate effectively in academic and co-curricular offerings
● Develop skills for lifelong learning
● Accept responsibility for their academic and personal growth in order to have a positive influence
on the school and community.
In addition to working to increase aspirations and build strong relationships with students, advisory will
be used for academic support and enrichment with their core teachers. Students will use this time for
homework, for remediation, or for extra help.
School Nurse/Health Services
The primary goal of the student health service is to promote optimal health in order to maximize each
student's ability to learn. Services include consultation and education regarding adolescent health
concerns, health appraisal and referral, disease and injury prevention and first aid. The health office is
responsible for maintaining individual student health records and often serves as a liaison between school
personnel, families and community resources. The school nurse welcomes students to drop in at any time
with questions or concerns. We ask that you notify us of any changes in your health status or emergency
contacts in order for us to provide you with appropriate service.
Social Service Worker
Social work services are provided at Freeport High School by a Licensed Clinical Social Worker, who
provides confidential counseling, referral, advocacy and facilitated family mediation and support. The
Social Worker serves as a liaison between teachers, students, and family or community providers.
Families or students in need of mental health support can access the social worker by appointment. The
School Social Worker is also involved in several initiatives to include Casco Bay Can, Natural Helpers,
20
Table of Contents

Psycho-education related to substance use, and crisis support.
Special Education
Special Education programming is offered in all areas leading to graduation with a Freeport High School
diploma. Educational programs are specifically designed for students with appropriate support as
determined by the Individual Education Plan (I.E.P.) process.
Crisis Team
It is unfortunate, but always possible, that a crisis will occur that impacts the high school community.
Recognizing this, a team of school and community members has been formed and trained to respond to
such emergencies. The goal of the team is to facilitate a smooth and caring response in the event of a
crisis, realizing the importance of maintaining a normal school atmosphere while providing help for those
students and adults who need support. A crisis response plan includes management guidelines and
specific intervention strategies for responding to personal, school, or community emergencies that impact
the emotional and physical well-being of our students, staff, and community.
21
Table of Contents

G
rading System
​
NOTE: Freeport High School’s proficiency-based education practices and policies that are
implemented school-wide are outlined in detail in a separate document which can be found on the
Freeport High School website.
Students are graded using a 0-100 point system, and Freeport High School does not use an accumulated
grade point average or any other method to determine a rank in class. Student academic achievements
will be grouped within numerical bands and utilized to identify, report and reward individual
accomplishments for purposes of graduation.
For the Class of 2020, grade point values are as follows:
Grade Point Value
93-100
85-92
77-84
70-76
0-69
Honors (H)
High Pass (HP)
Merit (M)
Pass (P)
No Credit (NC)
Withdraw (W)
Honor Roll for Class 2020
The Freeport High School Honor Roll is published four times a year to recognize the accomplishments of
students who meet high academic standards.
1. Only quarter grades count toward Honor Roll, not semester or final grades.
2. Students qualify in one of two categories:
22
Table of Contents

a. High Honors: All grades are 93 or better.
b. Honors: All grades are 85 or higher.
3. You must be enrolled in a minimum of six courses for each ranking period or 480 minutes per quarter
to qualify for the Honor Roll. No more than one class may be on a P/F grading system.
4. You are not eligible for the Honor Roll if you receive an incomplete in any course.
Once the incomplete is made up, you may receive Honor Roll distinction.
For the Classes of 2021 and beyond, students will earn two grades per course: one overall academic
course grade based on content area standards and a separate course grade for Habits of Work. Course
scores for both academic and habits of work scores will be determined by the average of all standards for
that particular course. Scoring categories and point values are as follows:
Insufficient or no Beginning Developing Proficient Distinguished
evidence
0 - 59 60 - 69 70 - 82 83 - 92 93 - 100
Honor Roll for Classes of 2021 and beyond:
The Freeport High School Honor Roll is published four times a year to recognize the accomplishments of
students who meet high academic standards.
1. Only marking period grades count toward Honor Roll, not semester or final grades.
2. Students will be recognized for their achievements in academic standards and Habits of Work
standards separately.
3. Students qualify in one of two categories:
○ High Honors: “Distinguished” (93-100) in each and every course
○ Honors: “Proficient” (83-92) in each and every course
4. You must be enrolled in a minimum of six courses for each ranking period or 480 minutes per quarter
to qualify for the Honor Roll. No more than one class may be on a P/F grading system.
5. You are not eligible for the Honor Roll if you receive an incomplete in any course.
Once the incomplete is made up, you may receive Honor Roll distinction.
23
Table of Contents

R
egistration Process
​
The Freeport High School Program of Studies serves as a guide to all the courses that are available and
states the requirements for taking each course. Students may use this guide to plan an appropriate
academic program.
Course Registration Requirements and Information
All students must be scheduled into a minimum of six classes each semester, earning six credits per year,
that will include classes required for graduation as well as elective courses. Study halls do not earn credit.
Students registering for classes must meet the requirements specified in the subject description outlined in
the Program of Studies or receive permission from the department chairperson in consultation with the
teacher.
Pre-registration Procedure for Next Year’s Courses
The development of a student’s educational program is accomplished through close teamwork with
parents, teachers, and counselors. Course requests help the high school to meet the educational needs of
the entire student body by determining which classes are offered and how many sections are needed. It is
important to take the pre-registration process very seriously. Failure to do so may hinder students from
​ ​
getting the courses needed for graduation or for future career and educational goals.
We expect to have students register for courses they would like to take next year, in late February and
March. Juniors will register first, then Sophomores, then Freshmen. Each grade level will have an
assigned week that the powerschool portal opens to allow for course requests. Students will receive their
Course Registration Form during their assigned week, and will meet with their current teachers for their
recommendations. Teachers and Parents will need to sign off on the student’s Course Registration Form
requests. Students will be able to register online in powerschool, and are encouraged to meet with their
guidance counselor during their registration week, for support with course selection.
Please note that as you request elective courses, you are asked to identify “alternative choices.” FHS may
not run some electives due to a low number of requests or due to budgetary constraints.
After the Master Schedule is developed, students will be given a copy of their schedule before leaving
school for the summer. In instances where a course was requested but will not be offered, or a conflict
exists, the counselor will assist the student in making an alternative selection before the student’s
schedule is finalized.
24
Table of Contents

Planning for College or Technical School
If you intend to continue your education in college or vocational-technical school, you must plan your
program accordingly. Most colleges and technical schools require at least Algebra 1 and Geometry
(Algebra 2 and Advanced Math are needed for many programs). Many colleges require at least 2 years of
the same Foreign Language. Two (preferably three) years of lab science are required for most colleges
and vocational programs. Refer to the recommended sequence of courses for post-secondary education in
the next section.
9th Grade Placement
The following criteria is considered when recommending students for an honors course:
● Recommendations from a students 8th grade teachers
● NWEA and MEA scores
● End-of-year grades in each 8th grade course
● Habits of Work scores in each 8th grade course
We believe this process gives the most accurate information and will result in a smooth and successful
transition to high school.
Honors and/or AP Course Placement Policy
A student seeking placement in an honors level or AP course should have a solid academic standing and
demonstrate a high level of consistent effort and motivation. Prerequisites are utilized in the
recommendation process to ensure that students have acquired sufficient mastery of material that will be
needed in the next level course. Students who do not receive the grade necessary to meet the prerequisite
may still be recommended for the next level course if the teacher, in consultation with the department
chair, feels that, regardless of the grade, the student has the skills and commitment to be successful in the
next course.
The following criteria is considered when recommending students for an honors or AP course:
● High scores in academic standards
● High scores in Habits of Work
● NWEA and/or MEA scores if applicable
● An agreement by the student to complete additional work (if needed) to get caught up to the
honors curriculum.
● Teacher recommendation required
Enrollment in Honors or Advanced Placement (AP) courses will be limited to students who meet the
specified department criteria. The expectations in these courses are high in terms of quality of work, time
and participation. Some Honors or Advanced Placement courses may also require summer work. Taking
the AP Exam is mandatory for any student taking an AP course. Students taking an AP course will be
expected to pay the AP Exam registration fee. There is a registration fee per AP course, so students
taking multiple exams must register and pay for multiple exams. Scholarships are available for those with
financial need. If for some reason a student does not take the AP Exam, the AP designation will be
removed from the course title.
25
Table of Contents

C
ourse Planning & Sequencing
​
We suggest that each family, working closely with their child and their child’s guidance counselor,
develop a tentative four year program that will meet the graduation requirements, challenge the student,
and accommodate his/her interests. This program should be reviewed prior to preliminary course
registration for the following year, in order to determine if it is still appropriate. Beginning with the 9th
grade, progress toward graduation depends upon the accumulation of credits. Students’ programs are
reviewed to make certain that each student will have adequate credits to progress with his/her class.
Meeting Requirements is the Responsibility of Each Student and His/Her Parent(s)/Guardian(s). Students
should know their credit total to date and be certain that they have sufficient credits for graduation. A
student may request to graduate early if he/she has met the graduation requirements.
Below is a guideline for the general sequencing of a four-year plan in most core academic areas.
Your customized four-year plan may vary from the examples below, as there are many potential
course sequence pathways. These are just some examples of typical pathways.
English - 4 minimum credits for graduation
Grade 9th 10th 11th 12th
Option 1 English - 9 English - 10 English-11 OR 2 English 12 semester
AP Language OR courses
AP Literature OR AP Language OR AP
Literature
Mathematics - 4 minimum credits for graduation
Grade 9th 10th 11th 12th
Option 1 Pre-Algebra Applied Algebra Geometry Algebra 2 or Quantitative Reasoning
Option 2 Applied Algebra Geometry Algebra 2 Quantitative Reasoning or Pre-Calculus
Option 3 Algebra 1 Geometry Algebra 2 Pre-Calculus
Option 4 Geometry Algebra 2 Pre-Calculus Calculus OR
AP Calculus OR
AP Statistics
Option 5 Algebra 2 Pre-Calculus Calculus OR Advanced, college-level math course
AP Calculus OR such as Differential Equations, Linear
AP Statistics Algebra, Multivariable Calculus
26
Table of Contents

Science - 4 minimum credits for graduation
Grade 9th 10th 11th 12th
Option 1 Earth Systems Biology (CP or Chemistry (CP or Chemistry (CP or Honors) OR
Science (CP or honors) Honors) OR Physics Physics OR AP Biology OR AP
honors) OR AP Biology OR AP Physics OR Chemistry in the
Physics OR Chemistry Community OR Environmental
in the Community Science OR Anatomy and
Physiology OR Forensics I/ II
OR AP Environmental Science
*Courses in 11th and 12th grade will depend on teacher recommendation, course prerequisite completion
and fulfillment of graduation requirements.
*STEM electives available for grades 9-12
Social Studies - 3 minimum credits for graduation
Grade 9th 10th 11th 12th
Option 1 Global Studies Modern World American History Elective OR
Conflict AND AP US History OR AP
American World History
Government and
Economics
Option 2 Global Studies Modern World AP US History Elective OR
Conflict AND OR AP World AP US History OR
American History AP World History
Government and
Economics
27
Table of Contents

C
ourse Add/Drop Process
​
Request for Schedule Change/Course Changes & the ADD/DROP Period
Students will be issued schedules based on their selections as reflected on their course registration sheets.
Every effort will be made to satisfy student requests, student needs, and parent and teacher
recommendations. Students will be encouraged and given every opportunity to discuss their choices with
teachers, advisors, parents, and school counselors before they leave for the summer.
There are two add/drop periods per school year; one at the beginning of the first semester, and one at the
beginning of the second semester. Students will be required to obtain an add/drop form in the Guidance
Office in order to request a course change. Students must then conference with the current course teacher,
the new course teacher, and a parent/guardian, and receive signatures of approval from all parties. Then
the Guidance Office will issue final approval and make the course change in powerschool.
The conclusion of the first two (2) weeks at the beginning of semester one and the conclusion of the first
​ ​
(1) week of semester two will mark the end of the add-drop period. After these dates, each schedule
​ ​
change request initiated by students or parents will require discussion among all parties and will be
judged on its own merits with the best interest of the student in mind. In some cases, a student, teacher,
parent and counselor conference may be required. If all parties make a concerted effort to choose
appropriate classes at the recommended level, most schedule changes, which can be disruptive, will be
avoided.
Appropriate Reasons for a Schedule Change:
-To strengthen the program by adding a subject or moving to a different program
-Failure of a preceding course in a sequence
-Successful completion of a course during summer school
-Recommendation from either the IEP Team or Administration
-Teacher recommendation
-Student request with approval of teacher, counselor, and parent
Inappropriate Reasons for a Schedule Change:
-To change from one teacher to another in the same subject
-To be with friends
-To free up either the afternoon or the morning
28
Table of Contents

C C
ourse atalog
​ ​
​ ​
E
nglish Department
​
English 9 (CP) Year 1 credit Prerequisite: none
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement
The ninth grade English course provides an introduction to high school reading, writing, speaking, listening, and
language usage. The course focuses on composition, vocabulary, and study skills through the study of world
literature. Frequent writing assignments include prompts, , discussion questions, short and long essays, creative
pieces, and responses to reading. Students extend their understanding of poetry, short stories, novels, graphic
novels, and dramatic texts to learn and refine skills for their high school career and beyond.
English 9 (Honors) Year 1 credit Prerequisite: Determined from Spring
​
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement Grade 8 NWEA, academic achievement,
and teacher recommendation
Honors English 9 offers students enrichment and challenge in the study of English language arts. Participants
will demonstrate a commitment to go beyond the English 9 curriculum, reach a higher level of achievement in
all work, and prepare for future courses of study. Honors English 9 will cover the regular course assignments in
more depth and breadth. Students will read additional literary works, write more extensively developed essays,
engage in extended vocabulary study, and complete supplemental individual and/or group projects.
Literacy 9 & 10 Year or .5 Prerequisite: Grade 8 and/or Grade 9 test
​
● Elective credit semester elective data and academic achievement identifies
credit a student as struggling with grade level
literacy skills
Students take this course in addition to their regular English 9 and 10 courses. Students will receive direct
instruction in reading strategies and writing skills. Multiple opportunities to write and analyze texts will allow
students to explore topics of interest while building literacy skills for success across the high school curriculum.
Humanities Skill 9 & 10 Year or .5 Prerequisite: Grade 8 and/or Grade 9 test
​
● Elective credit semester elective data and academic achievement identifies
credit a student as struggling with grade level
executive functioning skills
Students take this course in addition to their regular English 9 and 10 courses. Students will receive direct
instruction in organizational skills that will support their English and Global Studies classes. Skills include how
to organize materials, how to organize an essay or long-term project, how to read a textbook or support
29
Table of Contents

document, how to track and plan for assignments, and how to study for an exam.
English 10 (CP) Year 1 credit Prerequisite: English 9
​
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement
Tenth grade English provides an integrated balance of traditional and standards-based content, instruction, and
assessment. Classes promote the practice and demonstration of skills and knowledge found in the Common
Core English/Language Arts standards as well as additional instruction in general reading, writing, research,
listening, and speaking skills. When appropriate, students have choices related to content and assessment while
retaining full academic rigor. Units are designed based on essential questions that connect learning with larger
societal issues: deviation from social norms, the relationship between knowledge and happiness, and if our
choices define who we are.
English 10 (Honors) Year 1 credit Prerequisite: Determined from Spring
​
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement Grade 8 NWEA, academic achievement,
and teacher recommendation
This course focuses on developing the skills of literary and rhetorical analysis through close readings of literary
fiction and informational texts. Students regularly produce pieces of analytical, persuasive, and expository
writing, while also developing skills of oral expression through performance, debate and discussion. Works
studied may include The Catcher in the Ryet, Macbeth, Brave New World, and Lord of the Flies, as well as
​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​
various pieces of contemporary short fiction and poetry.
English 11: American Literature Year 1 credit Prerequisite: English 10
​
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement
In this year-long, one credit course, students will read a variety of texts (novels, non-fiction, poetry, and
journalism) that define or shed light on the "American experience." These texts will illuminate America's
achievements, its controversies, and its contradictions, and may include works (in whole or in part) such as
Arthur Miller’s, The Crucible, F Scott Fitzgerald's The Great Gatsby, choice novels, and various short stories,
​ ​ ​ ​
essays and poems.. Students will write in a variety of genres in response to literature and to events in American
society. The year's major writing emphasis will feature argumentation supported by research, but students will
also write expository essays, narratives, and a variety of pieces in different genres.
AP English Language & Composition Year 1 credit Prerequisite: English 10 or English 11
​
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement
The AP English Language and Composition course is designed to help students become skilled readers of prose
written in a variety of periods, disciplines, and rhetorical contexts and to become skilled writers who can
compose arguments for a number of purposes. Through their reading and writing in this course, students become
aware of the interactions among a writer’s purposes, audience expectations, and subjects that contribute to
effective composition. Writing assignments will include informal writing such as journal entries and creative
pieces, but will focus more fully on students' critical and interpretive responses to, and composition of, rhetoric.
The course reading list includes non-fiction (such as memoirs, speeches, essays, and editorials), Summer work is
required for entry into the class in September. Students taking this course are required to take the AP exam in
​
the spring.
AP English Literature & Composition Year 1 credit Prerequisite: English 10 or English 11
​
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement
30
Table of Contents

This course is devoted to in-depth analysis and interpretation of complex literary works. Students produce
analytical writing of various sorts including close reading, poetry explications, and character analyses. Personal
narratives and creative responses are also a component of the written expression required in this class. Works
studied may include Beowulf, Hamlet, Beloved, Heart of Darkness, The Stranger, A Streetcar Named Desire,
​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​
The Awakening, and more. Summer work is required for entry into the class in September. Students taking this
​ ​
course are required to take the AP exam in the spring.
English 12: Literature Semester .5 credit Prerequisite: English 11 or an AP Class
​
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement
This semester long comprehensive English class combines traditional content with standards-based teaching
practices. The class places a special emphasis on literary analysis by applying analysis skills to novels, short
​
stories, and a wide variety of poems including Cormac McCarthy’s The Road and Lawrence Sargent Hall’s The
​ ​ ​
Ledge. Students will write narrative and analysis essays, and will be exposed to a variety of 20th and 21st
​
century literary voices.
English 12: Composition Semester .5 credit Prerequisite: English 11 or an AP Class
​
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement
In this semester long course, students will learn about and apply writing related to a wide variety of genres and
purposes. Students will improve their argumentative writing in preparation for post-secondary education, but
students will also focus on self-reflection and their participation in the wider world through personal narrative.
Students who are applying to college will have the opportunity to workshop and polish their personal narratives
for the Common App. Students will also read and respond to a variety of texts such as editorials, reviews,
memoirs, and essays to learn genre elements, consider style elements, and explore literary themes and trends in
culture.
English 12: Creative Writing Semester .5 credit Prerequisite: English 11 or an AP Class
​
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement
This semester-long course is designed for students who wish to expand upon writing already done in the regular
English classroom. Students will produce works of fiction and nonfiction. The process of writing will be a focus
with students working through a series of drafts to produce polished, publishable pieces. Techniques in topic
generation, revision, editing and responding to the works of others will be covered. As a community of writers,
students will be expected to share work and contribute to The Clarion.
​ ​
English 12: Public Speaking Semester .5 credit Prerequisite: English 11 or an AP Class
​
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement
This course provides instruction and practice in the preparation and delivery of speeches within a welcoming
and lively classroom setting. Students will learn how to research, outline, and deliver short, informal
presentations, as well as longer speeches. Students will also sharpen their skills in critical listening. Upon
completion, students will be able to prepare and deliver well-organized speeches and demonstrate the speaking
skills necessary to be effective communicators in academic settings, in the workplace, and in the community.
Although some (many) might find the thought of public speaking terrifying, the rewards for acquiring these
skills are enormous.
Media and Social Media Studies Semester .5 credit Prerequisite: Open to 9th-12th graders
● Elective Credit
31
Table of Contents

This class will examine current trends in “the media.” We will will look at how information from the “media” is
delivered differently than in the past and how social media plays a role in informing the public. We will look at
such mediums as film (documentaries), podcasts, blogs, and both electronic and print sources. In addition, we
will examine how social media has changed what it means to be a “journalist.” Do we all have the potential to
be “journalists” in today’s age of technology? After taking this class, students will be better consumers of
media. We may also re-create what we study by producing media for the Freeport High School community in
The Falcon Outlet. This could include the creation of blogs, podcasts, and even the the production of
live-streaming Freeport High School events (such as sports, performances, meetings, etc.).
Desktop Publishing/Yearbook Year 1 credit Prerequisite: Open to 11th-12th graders
● Elective Credit
This course is designed to give motivated and deadline-oriented students an opportunity to work on the
publication of the yearbook. They will be involved in every aspect of the page layout, editing, advertising, sales,
and distribution of the school’s yearbook. Students will take photos of and interview the student body, as well as
attend photographic opportunities during and after school. This course allows students to work independently
and in small groups. It gives students a chance to use their creative and organizational skills to produce a record
of their school life that will be seen by their community. Students will develop a strong working knowledge of a
web-based design and publishing program.
Endeavor Program Year variable Prerequisite: Teacher Recommendation
​
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement & Counselor Approval only
This program provides 11th graders with an integrated experience for their English, science, and social studies
classes focusing on contemporary issues of relevance to students. For those needing it, it also serves as credit
recovery for a science, ELA and/or social studies credit or individual learning plans for enrichment purposes.
Students are also provided social emotional support and engage in project-based learning experiences. Students
are selected based on previous academic, attendance and behavior records.
32
Table of Contents

H
ealth & Physical Education Department
​
P
hysical Education Courses
​
Team Sports - Level 1 Semester .5 credit Prerequisite: None
​
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement
This course provides supportive opportunities for a variety of physical activities that enhance the physical,
mental, social, and emotional health of the student. Curriculum addresses motor skill development, physical
​
fitness concepts and responsible and social interactions. The activity component includes lifelong recreational
​
activities as well as competitive activities. Examples of offerings are: tennis, archery, Frisbee, badminton,
basketball, volleyball, soccer, and pickleball.
EXCITE - Level 1 Semester .5 credit Prerequisite: None
​
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement
This course provides supportive opportunities for a variety of physical activities that enhance the physical,
mental, social, and emotional health of the student. The activities are non-sport oriented and non-competitive.
Curriculum addresses motor skill development, physical fitness concepts and responsible and social interactions.
​
Activity components may include yoga, circuit training, weight training, cooperative and team building games
and a variety of outdoor activities.
Individual Sports-Level 1 Semester .5 credit Prerequisite: None
​
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement
This course provides supportive opportunities for a variety of physical activities that enhance the physical,
mental, social, and emotional health of the student. Curriculum addresses motor skill development, physical
fitness concepts and responsible and social interactions. Examples of offerings are: tennis, archery, disc golf,
badminton, track and field and pickleball, orienteering and lawn games.
Fitness - Level 2 Semester .5 credit Prerequisite: Successful completion of a
​
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement Level 1
Students gain knowledge of personal fitness concepts through class work and participation in a variety of
fitness-based activities. Students develop and implement an individual fitness program including a
cardiovascular, flexibility and weight training component. Principles of exercise, nutrition, and the areas of
fitness will be explored. This course encourages each student to develop a fit and healthy lifestyle.
Weight Training - Level 2 Semester .5 credit Prerequisite: Successful completion of a
​
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement Level 1
This course is designed for individuals who are interested in improving their own level of fitness. Students will
acquire the knowledge needed to design and implement a personal weight training program. Cardiovascular
exercise, plyometrics and other fitness enhancing activities are incorporated. This course is recommended for
33
Table of Contents

students who are self-motivated and eager to improve their level of fitness. Students will self-assess throughout
the semester and exercise programs will be adjusted for optimal success.
Tone and Sculpt - Level 2 Semester .5 credit Prerequisite: Successful completion of a
​
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement Level 1
This course is designed for students who are interested in improving their own level of fitness in a supportive
environment. Students in this course may not be familiar or comfortable with the weight room equipment.
Students will acquire the knowledge needed to design and implement a personal weight training program.
Cardiovascular exercise, plyometrics and other fitness enhancing activities are incorporated. This course is
recommended for students who are looking to improve their level of fitness in a supportive environment.
Students will self- assess throughout the semester and exercise programs will be adjusted for optimal success.
Women’s Fitness and Self Defense - Semester .5 credit Prerequisite: Successful completion of a
​
Level 2 Level 1 and Grades 11-12
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement
This course will include self-defense technique training important to the safety of all women. Students will
actualize their own physical power and dependence on themselves for protection. This will be accompanied
with the ability to recognize and reduce risk in everyday situations. This class will also include a component
targeted to improve fitness in a challenging and supportive environment. Students will participate in a variety of
fitness-based activities and gain knowledge of the impact on their health.
Outdoor Fitness - Level 2 Semester .5 credit Prerequisite: Successful completion of a
​
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement level 1
This course will introduce students to the advanced skills needed to ensure that outdoor adventures remain fun,
challenging and safe. Outdoor activities include hiking, snowshoeing, camping, orienteering, and basic first aid.
The course will also stress environmental awareness. This course requires 2 full day field trips, which include a
winter and a fall/spring hike. *Hiking and winter boots are required. *If this is a hardship. Boots can be
supplied by the department with advanced notice. This class can be taken as an Independent Study.
​
Unified Physical Education Semester .5 credit Prerequisite: None
​
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement
Unified Physical Education provides a unique opportunity for students with and without disabilities to come
together through ongoing educational and physical activities, using the power of Special Olympics. The Unified
Physical Education course is structured around the national physical education standards and grade-level
outcomes. Additionally, the class supports the development of leadership skills for all students as well as the
empowerment of ALL students to foster an inclusive class and school-wide environment. Students in Unified
Physical Education courses may have the opportunity to participate in competitions with other schools or
attend Special Olympics events.
Physical Education Leadership Semester .5 credit Prerequisite: Teacher Approval
​
● Elective
Through the physical education leadership program, students have the opportunity to develop leadership skills
by direct assistance to the physical education staff. Student Leaders will be expected to become familiar with
equipment, safety procedures, learn rules and officiate with each activity. Student Leaders will be able to assist
34
Table of Contents

with or conduct large group games and warm up activities to develop voice and leadership qualities essential to
working with large groups of people.
Fitness Lab Semester .5 credit Prerequisite: None
​
● Elective
The fitness lab is an opportunity for students to advance their personal health and fitness. The Fitness Lab will
help students develop individualized personal training programs to meet health and fitness goals. Students will
work with the Lab Instructor to select daily and weekly cardiovascular and muscular activities to meet these
goals. The Fitness Lab has cardio and weight training equipment for all levels and abilities, including treadmill,
elliptical machines, spin bikes, free weights and weight machines.
After School Fitness Lab Semester .5 credit Prerequisite: None
​
● Elective
Students will earn elective credit for attending 45 hours (approximately 2-3 days per week) of the Fitness Lab
after school. Students will sign in each day to track hours. The fitness lab is an opportunity for students to
advance their personal health and fitness. The Fitness Lab will help students develop individualized personal
training programs to meet health and fitness goals. Students will work with the Lab Instructor to select daily and
weekly cardiovascular and muscular activities to meet these goals. The Fitness Lab has cardio and weight
training equipment for all levels and abilities, including treadmill, elliptical machines, spin bikes, free weights
and weight machines.
H
ealth Courses
​
Health Semester .5 credit Prerequisite: Grade 10 or above
​
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement
Students are provided with current, accurate information on health topics. Students assess their lifestyles and
develop strategies to help them cope with contemporary health issues. Topics include stress management,
mental health, suicide intervention, sexuality, global health and chemical dependency.
Advanced Health Semester .5 credit Prerequisite: Health
​
● Elective
The purpose of this course is to explore in greater depth current health issues surrounding nutrition, public and
global health, epidemiology, and disease prevention. The course will also involve investigating health related
career choices and health education.
35
Table of Contents

M
athematics Department
​
Pre-Algebra Year 1 credit Prerequisite: Student placed based on 8th
​
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement grade spring NWEA score and teacher
recommendation
This course is designed to develop those skills and concepts necessary to the transition from basic math to
Algebra. Pre-Algebra includes the study of whole numbers, decimals, fractions, percents, integers, variable
expressions and equations. Followed by Applied Algebra or Algebra 1.
Math Fundamentals Year or .5 credit Prerequisite: Student placed based on
​
semester per year grade 8 or grade 9 test data, academic
elective achievement, teacher recommendation
based on student need
Students take this course in addition to their regular FHS mathematics course. Students will receive direct
instruction and work through personalized computer-based skills plan to strengthen any areas of weakness.
Math Support Year or .5 credit Prerequisite: Student placed based on
​
semester per year grade 8 or grade 9 test data, academic
elective achievement, teacher recommendation
based on student need
Students take this course in addition to their regular FHS mathematics course. Students will receive executive
functioning support tied directly to mathematics as well as additional practice and support for their current math
course.
Applied Algebra Year 1.5 credit Prerequisite: Student placed based on 8th
​
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement grade spring NWEA score and teacher
recommendation
This course is similar to the Algebra 1 (CP) but it meets everyday for a full block on day one and a half block on
day two. This course should be followed by a full-year Geometry course.
Algebra 1 (CP) Year 1 credit Prerequisite: Student placed based on 8th
​ ​ ​
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement grade spring NWEA score and teacher
recommendation
This course is the foundation for Freeport High School mathematics courses. It is the bridge from the concrete to
the abstract study of mathematics. This course emphasizes algebraic language, structure, concepts and skills.
Major topics include algebraic properties and the real number system, functions and their graphs, linear
equations and inequalities, systems of linear equations and inequalities, polynomials and factoring, algebraic
fractions and real world applications. This course should be followed by a full-year Geometry course.
Algebra I (Honors) Year 1 credit Prerequisite: Student placed based on 8th
​
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement grade spring NWEA score and teacher
36
Table of Contents

recommendation
This rigorous course covers all Algebra 1 CP topics in greater depth and with more problem solving. Includes
the study of quadratic functions and rational expressions and equations. This course should be followed by a
full-year Geometry course.
Geometry (CP) Year 1 credit Prerequisite: Algebra 1
​
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement
● May be taken concurrently with
Algebra 2 or Honors Algebra 2
This is a course examining two- and three-dimensional geometric figures and their properties. Students explore
concepts that develop logical thinking through deductive as well as inductive reasoning. Topics include the
geometry of points, lines, planes, angles, polygons, circles, as well as coordinate geometry, properties of
congruence, area, volume, and trigonometry. This course should be followed by an Algebra 2 course, or, if being
taken concurrently with an Algebra 2 course, by Pre-Calculus and/or AP Stats.
Geometry (Honors) Year 1 credit Prerequisite: Student placed based on 8th
​
● Fulfills a Graduation grade spring NWEA score and teacher
Requirement recommendation OR Algebra 1 Test score
● May be taken concurrently and teacher recommendation
with Algebra 2 Or Honor
Algebra 2
This course covers the same topics as the Geometry course, with the addition of: formal logic and proof, an
emphasis on developing problem solving and communication skills, and this course requires a strong Algebra 1
background. This course should be followed by an Algebra 2 course, or, if taken concurrently with an Algebra 2
course, by a Pre-Calculus course or AP Stats.
Algebra 2 (CP) Year 1 credit Prerequisite: Algebra 1
​​ ​
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement
● May be taken concurrently with
Geometry or Honors Geometry
This course reviews the properties and operations of the real number system and extends them to the complex
system. Students learn concepts and skills to enable them to find relationships among sets of data and represent
those relationships graphically and algebraically. They examine a variety of functions including linear,
quadratic, and absolute value. Problem solving and critical thinking skills are emphasized. Should be followed
by Pre-Calculus and/or AP Stats.
Algebra 2 (Honors) Year 1 credit Prerequisite: Student placed based on 8th
​​ ​
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement grade spring NWEA score and teacher
● May be taken concurrently with recommendation OR Algebra 1 &
Geometry or Honors Geometry Teacher Recommendation
This course stresses problem solving techniques, critical thinking skills, and an in-depth study of functions and
their graphs, matrices and determinants, sequences and series including the Binomial Theorem. Exposure to
advanced topics and applications is emphasized. Computer applications and scientific graphing calculators are
used extensively. Should be followed by either Honors Precalculus and/or AP Statistics.
37
Table of Contents

Pre-Calculus (CP) Year 1 credit Prerequisite: Algebra II
​
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement
This course studies the functions introduced in Algebra 1 and Algebra 2 in greater depth and scope. It
emphasizes real world applications, connections to college courses and majors, with particular emphasis on
Trigonometry and Logarithmic & Exponential functions. There is an emphasis on a variety of note taking,
problem-solving, and critical thinking strategies relevant to continuing on to higher education. It is an excellent
preparation for higher-level mathematics. Should be followed by a Calculus course and/or AP Statistics.
Pre-Calculus (Honors) Year 1 credit Prerequisite:Algebra II and Teacher
​
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement Recommendation
This course provides a strong background for further studies in Math and related areas. The function is the
underlying and unifying concept of most of the topics in this course. First semester is devoted to the study of
​
Trigonometry. The second semester offers a review of functions covered in Algebra 2, including polynomials,
​
rational functions, exponential functions and logarithms. A study of analytic geometry is also covered. First
​
semester is devoted to the study of Trigonometry. Should be followed by a Calculus course and/or AP Statistics.
Quantitative Reasoning Year 1 credit Prerequisite: Algebra I
​
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement
This course explores connections between mathematics and various facets of modern life. Quantitative reasoning
enables both understanding and decision-making about aspects of work, money management, civic participation,
and recreation. Topics in this course include unit analysis, percentages, personal finance, statistics, probability,
linear and exponential growth, mathematical modeling, and geometry.
Calculus (CP) Year 1 credit Prerequisite: Pre-Calculus
​
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement
This course offers students the option to take a rigorous course of calculus with a more flexible breadth and
depth of coverage than the advanced placement curriculum. It will prepare students for taking calculus in college
as well as any calculus-based science classes they may take in college.
Topics covered include: Functions, Graphs and Limits, Derivatives, and Integrals.
AP Calculus AB Year 1 credit Prerequisite: Pre-Calculus and Teacher
​
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement Recommendation
This course follows the Advanced Placement Calculus AB curriculum put out by the College Board in
conjunction with the advanced placement examination. It prepares students for all topics on the AP test
including: functions, graphs and limits, derivatives, and integrals. All students will be required to take AP
exams.
AP Calculus BC Year 1 credit Prerequisite: AP Calculus AB and
​
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement Teacher Recommendation
This course follows the Advanced Placement Calculus BC curriculum put out by the College Board in
conjunction with the advanced placement examination. The outline for Calculus BC includes all Calculus AB
topics, with additional study of limits involving infinity, sequences and series and vectors. All students will be
required to take AP exams.
Online Differential Equations Semester .5 credit Prerequisite: Taken after completing AP
​
38
Table of Contents

● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement Calculus BC, teacher recommendation
only
An advanced math course and the first course in differential equations. Topics generally include separable,
homogeneous, exact, and linear first order differential equations; variations of parameters, differential operators,
systems of differential equations, and applications.
Online Linear Algebra Semester .5 credit Prerequisite: Taken after completing AP
​
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement Calculus BC, teacher recommendation
only
An advanced math course, linear algebra is a branch of mathematics that studies systems of linear equations and
the properties of matrices. Topics in this course generally include the study of vectors in the plane and space,
systems of linear equations, matrices, determinants, vectors, vector spaces, linear transformations, inner
products, eigenvalues and eigenvectors.
AP Statistics Year 1 credit Prerequisite: Algebra II AND
​
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement Pre-Calculus (can be taken concurrently
with Pre-Calculus)
This course follows the Advanced Placement Statistics curriculum put out by the College Board in conjunction
with the advanced placement examination. It prepares students for all topics on the AP test including:
exploratory analysis, planning a study, probability, and statistical inferences. All students will be required to take
the AP exam.
Personal Finance Semester .5 credit Prerequisite: Algebra I
​
● Math Elective Credit
This course helps students understand the world of money management in the modern world. It will emphasize
knowledge and skills necessary for successfully negotiating our American financial system: forms of pay;
banking; investing; credit cards and other credit issues; budgets; federal, state, and city taxes; and home and
apartment ownership and rental. There is a $20 fee associated with this class. Scholarships available.
​
Residential Architecture Semester .5 credit Prerequisite:
● Math Elective Credit
In this course, students will learn about the different architectural styles that can be found across the United
States and be able to recognize their identifying characteristics. They will explore the concept of form and
function and analyze the purposes of different design features. This course will also have students deal with the
basics of architectural drafting while designing a residential home of their choice. Students will develop an
understanding of what an efficient and workable house design is through this hands-on activity.
39
Table of Contents