SOURCE: https://www.rsu5.org/fs/resource-manager/view/599d4366-c8db-415c-8c0c-7b590f06d2a7
SECTION: /board-of-directors-and-policies/board-agendas-and-minutes/agendas
TITLE: Item 7.A. FHS Program of Studies
TYPE: Finalsite-PDF
============================================================

FREEPORT HIGH SCHOOL
30 Holbrook Street, Freeport, Maine 04032
Ph: (207) 865-4706 Fax: (207) 865-2900
Jennifer Gulko Alexis L. Rog
Principal Guidance Counselor
Charlie Mellon Dana Clark
Assistant Principal Guidance Counselor
P. Craig Sickels Liz Peirce
Director of Athletics Guidance Counselor
1-31-18
Dear RSU5 School Board members:
We have been working as a staff to revise and enhance the Freeport High School Program
of Studies for the 2018-2019 school year. We sought feedback from members of all FHS
departments, and the guidance team, along with administration, has been working to make
any revisions necessary. As we moved into a proficiency-based system for both the 9th and
​
​
10th graders in the Classes of 2021 and 2022, there are some aspects of the Program of
Studies that pertain just to those students, while other aspects pertain to next year’s
Juniors and Seniors. In order to keep the Program of Studies a manageable length for
students, parents and other stakeholders, we will continue to publish a separate
Proficiency-Based Learning Family Guide, which outlines our school processes tied to
proficiency-based practices. We have made some changes to our course offerings as well as
some credit and school support information that are outlined below:
● Page 2: Core Values and Beliefs statement replaced mission statement
● Page 7: New school profile added
● Page 10: Took out Class of 2018 requirements, now have 2019 & 2020 then 2021
and beyond
● Page 17: Added guidance counselor assignments, now alphabetical for grades 9-11
● Page 20: Revised description of RTI and added SAT team.
● Page 20: Changed description of guided study halls, all 9th graders are now in
guided study
● Page 24: Change of the description of graduation requirements
● Page 25: Added “NOTE: Freeport High School’s proficiency-based education
​
practices and policies are outlined in detail in a separate document.” This was
​
done in order to not make the Program of Studies too long
● Page 29-31: changed 11 and 12 course sequence for ELA and Social Studies (change
with American Studies, which is now turning into two separate classes), revised
science sequence
● Page 34: American Studies changed to ELA 11: American Lit
● Page 36: Changed Journalism to Media Studies, open to 9-12th graders
● Page 37-38: Changed PE descriptions: added fitness lab, after school fitness lab (for
credit), added unified PE

● Page 42: Took out geometry in the real world due to low enrollment, added college
prep level statistics
● Page 44: Changed Science and Sustainability to new course Earth Systems Science.
All freshmen MUST take Earth Systems Science (CP or Honors), aligned to NGSS
standards.
● Page 46-47: CSI is now called Forensics and removed Current Topics in Science, no
longer offering outdoor ecology due to low enrollment/low student interest
● Page 50: Replaced American Studies with American History
○ Added AP US History, students strongly encouraged but not required to take
American History class first
○ Removed the Model UN Prep class due to low enrollment
● Page 53: Removed Playwriting and Intro to Dance due to low enrollment
○ Replaced with more drama classes:
■ Creative Drama which will focus on creating plays for younger
audiences and “touring” the play to our local elementary schools
■ Advanced Theatre production where students will participate in all
elements of a full theatrical production
● Page 60: added description about the Endeavor program
● Page 69-75: Edited the At A Glance pages
We look forward to the Class of 2022 joining our FHS community and we are excited about
our new course offerings for next year.
Regards,
Jen Gulko
Accredited Member New England Association of Schools and Colleges

P
rogram of Studies Overview
​
Introduction
The Freeport High School Program of Studies presents information about the courses offered at the
school. Students should use this book as they plan an appropriate academic program. Please recognize
that these courses are possible offerings for the coming year. A variety of factors, including the number of
students enrolled in a given course, will determine whether it is offered or not.
The Freeport High School Program of Studies also provides information about our Student Services
Department, its role in your student’s education, and the department’s processes associated with course
registration. Other support services are described as well. Graduation requirements for current and future
Freeport High School students are fully explained.
DISCLAIMER: Subsequent to publication of this catalog, Freeport High School reserves the right
to make changes in courses, program requirements, policy and regulations as circumstances,
funding, and enrollment dictate. There is no guarantee that any course listed in this catalog will be
offered in any given semester. The ongoing work of aligning the curriculum with the Maine
Standards will, of necessity, result in changes in course content. Students and parents will be
informed if changes in course content create a significant difference between the course descriptions
as it appears in this Program of Studies and the revised course content.
NOTE: Freeport High School’s proficiency-based education practices and policies are outlined in
detail in a separate document.
1

C
ore Values and Beliefs
​
Mission:
​
Freeport High School is committed to integrity, community, perseverance, and creativity. We celebrate
individuality and empower students to achieve their highest personal aspirations in the pursuit of
excellence.
Values:
We value Integrity
​
● Those with integrity treat others and themselves with respect, honesty, kindness, and fairness.
We value Community
​
● Those who value community embrace relationships, celebrate diversity, display empathy, and
nurture well-being
We value Perseverance
​
● Those who persevere take ownership of their learning, embrace challenge, and aspire to achieve
their potential in the face of difficulties.
We value Creativity
​
● Those who are creative engage their world with a spirit of curiosity, take risks, and approach
problem solving in innovative ways.
Beliefs about learning: We are...
Learner-centered
● We believe that when we take responsibility for our learning, we are empowered to become
collaborative learners who are proficient at seeking support and are self-directed.
Critical thinkers
● We believe that when we examine a problem or challenge from multiple perspectives with an
open mind and a questioning spirit, we are able to enrich our understanding of the world.
Effective communicators
● We believe that when we articulate our thoughts and listen actively, we are able to effectively
engage others, collaborate within our community, and reflect on our strengths and weaknesses.
Problem solvers
● We believe that when we take initiative, use a variety of approaches and strategies, and learn
from both our successes and failures, we are able to solve complex and important problems.
2

A
ccreditation
​
Freeport High School is accredited by the New England Association of Schools and Colleges, Inc., a
non-governmental, nationally recognized organization whose affiliated institutions include elementary
schools through collegiate institutions offering postgraduate instruction.
Accreditation of an institution by the NEASC indicates that it meets or exceeds criteria for the assessment
of institutional quality periodically applied through a peer group review process. An accredited school or
college is one which has available the necessary resources to achieve its stated purposes through
appropriate educational programs, is substantially doing so, and gives reasonable evidence that it will
continue to do so in the foreseeable future. Institutional integrity is also addressed through accreditation.
Accreditation by the New England Association is not partial but applies to the institution as a whole. As
such, it is not a guarantee of the quality of every course or program offered, or the competence of
individual graduates. Rather, it provides reasonable assurance about the quality of opportunities available
to students who attend the institution.
Inquiries regarding the status of an institution’s accreditation by the New England Association should be
directed to the administrative staff of Freeport High School.
3

T
able of Contents
​
School Contact/Directory………………………………………………………………….… page 5
​
Letter from the Principal………………………………………………………………….… page 6
​
School Profile…………………………………………………………………………………..pages 7-8
Maine State Law & Graduation Requirements…………………………………………….. pages 9-14
​
Guiding Principles/21st Century Learning Expectations…………………………………. pages 15-16
​
Guidance Department……………………………………………………………………….. page 17
​
Post-Secondary Planning: Possible Pathways…………………………………….................page 18
​
Academic Support………………………………………………………………….……….....pages 19-20
​
Additional Support Services………………………..………………………………….…..… pages 21-22
​
Graduation Requirements…………………………………………………….………………page 23
​
Grading System…………………………………………………….……………………….…page 24-25
​
Registration Process……………………………………………………………..….…………pages 26-27
​
Course Planning & Sequencing………………………………………………..….…………. pages 28-29
​
Course Add/Drop………………………………………………………..………….………… page 30
​
Course Catalog………………………………………………………………..…….………… page 31
English Department Course Offerings……………………………………..…….…………. pages 32-35
​
Health & Physical Education Course Offerings……………………………………..…….. pages 36-38
​
Mathematics Department Course Offerings……………………………………..…….…… pages 39-42
​
Science & Technology Department Course Offerings……………………………………... pages 43-46
​
Social Studies Department Course Offerings………………………………….…..…….… pages 47-49
​
Visual and Performing Arts Department Course Offerings……………………………… pages 50-55
​
Musical Arts……………………………………..…….………………….………... pages 50-51
​
Theatre Arts……………………………………..…….………………….………... page 52
​
Visual Arts……………………………………..…….…………………..…………. pages 52-54
​
Media Arts……………………………………..…….……….………….…………. page 54-55
​
World Languages Department Course Offerings……………………………………..…….pages 56-58
​
Additional Academic Opportunities………………………………….…..…….…………… pages 59-61
​
Region Ten Technical High School……………………………………………...….………...pages 62-65
​
Extracu rricular Clubs and Activities……………………………………..…….……………page 66
​
Athletics……………………………………..…….………………….……………………….. page 67
​
At-A-Glance Course Index……………………………………..…….……………….….….. pages 68-74
​
4

C
ontact Information
​
SCHOOL & DISTRICT NUMBERS
Freeport High School Main Office 865-4706
Region 10 Technical High School 729-6622
Freeport High School Instructional Support Services 865-2856
Ms. Becky Foley, Superintendent’s Office 865-0928, x5
ADMINISTRATION - 865-4706
Ms. Jen Gulko, Principal x224
Mr. Charlie Mellon, Assistant Principal x223
Mr. Craig Sickles, Athletic Director x228
SCHOOL COUNSELING & SUPPORT TEAM - 865-4706
High School Counseling Office x305
Ms. Alexis Rog, Counselor & Chair x306
Ms. Dana Clark, Counselor x304
Ms. Liz Peirce, Counselor x303
Ms. Margarete Schnauck, School Social Worker x253
Ms. Emily Guyer, School Nurse x200
5

P
rincipal’s Letter
​
The Freeport Program of Studies is intended to provide both parents and students an overview of Freeport
High School’s academic expectations and an understanding of the various other programs and supports
available to students to promote success during their high school careers.
Freeport High School is a school community that prides itself on building strong relationships with
students and preparing them for high levels of success in college and/or careers after high school. We are
dedicated to pushing our students to become critical thinkers, creative problem-solvers, perseverant
learners and positive community members.
The 2018-2019 school year will bring many exciting opportunities, such as the use of our outstanding new
facilities with the completion of our renovation and expansion project. This includes our state-of-the-art
classrooms, cafeteria, fitness center, band and chorus spaces, STEM lab, and a renovated library. We are
ecstatic about the addition of a world-class track and field that will be used by students and community
members alike. The Classes of 2021 and 2022 are our classes that will receive a proficiency-based
diploma from FHS. Although some policies and procedures have shifted for our 9th and 10th graders, our
FHS staff will continue to provide authentic and rigorous learning experiences for all students, hold all
students to high expectations for learning, and support students in reaching those goals.
Proficiency-based education rests on the belief that all students should be held to high standards for
learning, should be clear about what they are expected to learn, and should be given regular feedback
about their progress toward those standards as well as continuous support. Proficiency-based diplomas
are awarded on the basis of demonstrating the skills and knowledge that prepare students for success in
our ever-changing 21st century world and workplace. Proficiency-based education outlines a system to
ensure all students learn and demonstrate those skills and content. These diploma requirements go into
effect for the FHS Class of 2021 and beyond; therefore, elements of the Program of Studies pertain
specifically to those students who will be required to demonstrate understanding of our content standards.
Our faculty is working diligently to continue to implement, reflect on and refine proficiency-based
​
practices that will support our students in reaching high levels of academic and personal success.
As we move into the 2018-2019 school year, we will continue to work to support the students of Freeport,
Durham and Pownal both in and out of the classroom. We will strive to provide a challenging academic
experience while encouraging our students to persevere and succeed. We look forward to welcoming new
members of our Freeport High School student body and community.
Sincerely,
Jen Gulko, Principal Charlie Mellon, Assistant Principal
Table of Contents
6

FREEPORT HIGH SCHOOL
30 Holbrook Street Dr. Becky J Foley, Superintendent
Freeport, ME 04032 Jennifer Gulko, Principal
Main Office: 207-865-4706 Charlie Mellon, Assistant Principal
Fax: 207-865-2900 Craig Sickles, Athletic Director
www.fhs.rsu5.org
Counselors:
CEEB Code: 200385
Dana Clark, Liz Peirce, Alexis Rog
COMMUNITY SCHOOL
Freeport High School is focused on guiding students to explore and Accreditation: New England Association
achieve their greatest potential across academics, athletics, and the arts of Schools and Colleges
in an environment emphasizing social awareness and compassion. Our
Total enrollment: 536
graduates reflect this adventurous, inclusive and challenging spirit, and
Total Senior class: 119
are engaged citizens with a sense of responsibility and community.
Special Education: 11.2%
Our students benefit from their close-knit community and values. We are Free and Reduced Lunch: 22.5%
fortunate to be in a beautiful area of Maine and the home of L.L. Our school is built from the communities of
Bean. We are an international tourism and retail powerhouse annually Pownal, Durham and Freeport, Maine.
hosting over 400 times our resident population in visitors. Employment is Freeport High School regularly scores in
plentiful in the service industry, and many of our students grow up the top 10% of all Maine high schools on
developing the grit and determination that can be built by having a standardized tests, but we encourage our
challenging job while also tuning their interpersonal skills with visitors to students to look beyond those numbers
our community from all over the globe. and create and embrace their own learning
goals.
CURRICULUM GRADUATION REQUIREMENTS
Freeport High School is one of Maine’s leaders in transitioning to a
22 Credits Total
proficiency-based curriculum. The class of 2021 will be the first to earn a
proficiency-based diploma. We emphasize engagement and learning over English 4
seat-time and encourage students to explore their own directions, but do Math 3
so in a manner that ensures a student masters the critical concepts Social Studies 3
outlined in Maine’s Learning Results. Science and Technology 4
Freeport High School offers Advanced Placement (AP), Honors (H), and World Language 1
college preparatory level classes. As a function of the small size of our Visual and Performing Arts 1
school and the scheduling challenges that sometimes presents, it is not Health .5
possible for a student to take all the AP courses offered in any given year. Physical Education 1
However, all students are provided with laptops and have access to Electives 4.5
Virtual High School (VHS) and other online courses at all levels, including
AP.
* Additional Courses are offered through: Maine Region Ten Technical
High School, Morse Street Early Pre-Apprenticeship, JMG (Jobs for Maine
Graduates) PLATO, Virtual High School, Work Study, AP4ALL
HONORS COURSES
ENGLISH MATHEMATICS SCIENCE SOCIAL STUDIES VISUAL + PERFORMING
ARTS
AP Language & Composition Calculus AB Biology World History Studio Art
Literature & Composition Calculus BC Environ. Science Art History
Statistics Physics C: Music Theory
Mechanics
HONORS English 9 Geometry Science & Western Studies Foundation of Art
English 10 Algebra I Sustainability Global Studies Chamber Choir
English 11 Algebra II Biology American Studies
Pre-Calculus Chemistry

POST SECONDARY PLANS: CLASS OF 2017 ASSESSEMENT GRADE
Class of 2017 SAT Mean Scores: FHS
114
Students 11th Grade
Reading 507
57% Math 499
4-Year College
Total 1006
20%
2-Year College State Mean Score: 994
A P DATA
14%
Employment SCORE 3 OR ABOVE:
126
61%
4% GAP Year EXAMS
3 47 Students
71 4 23 Students
4%
Armed Forces
5 7 Students
STUDENTS
GRADING SCALE GRADE POINT AVERAGE
Grade Grade Pt. Value Grade Value
A 93-100 H Honors
B 85-92 HP High Pass
C 77-84 P Pass
D 70-76 W Withdrew
F 0-69 F Fail
NC No Credit
Honor Roll:
High Honors = All grades 93 or above
Honors = All Grades 85 or above
Beginning with the Class of 2000, Freeport High School will not
report rank in class. Freeport designates summa cum laude with
distinction (96-100), summa cum laude (93-100), magna cum
laude (89-92), cum laude (85-88) and rounds to the nearest
whole number.
COLLEGES
The following is a partial list of the post-secondary institutions at which the graduates of 2017 were
accepted:
American University Embry-Riddle Aeron. U. Middlebury College Saint Lawrence Univ. University of Chicago
Arcadia University Eastern Maine C.C. Univ. of New England Saint Michael’s University of Maine
Bentley University Fairfield University Univ. of N.H. College Univ. of ME Farmington
Berklee College of Music Fashion Inst. of Tech. Nova S.E. Univ. Salve Regina College Univ. of ME Fort Kent
Bowdoin College Florida Inst. of Tech. Providence College Savannah College of Univ. of Massachusetts
Brown University George Washington U. Purdue University Art and Design Univ. of Prince Ed. Isl.
Clark University Gettysburg College Quinnipiac University Schnectady C.C. Univ. of Vermont
Central ME C.C. Hartt School of Music Rensselaer Polytechnic Simmons College Wentworth Inst. of Tech
Colby-Sawyer College High Point University Inst. Southern ME C.C. Wesleyan College
Univ. CO, Boulder Kennebec Valley C.C. Robert Morris Univ. Springfield College W. Kentucky C.C.
Columbia University Landmark College Roger Williams Univ. Syracuse Univ. West Virginia University
Dartmouth College Loyola University Sacred Heart Univ. Thomas College Wheaton College
Univ. of Denver Maine College of Art Saint Anselm College U.S. Coast Guard Worcester Polytechnic
Elon University Maine Maritime Acad. Saint Joseph’s College U.S. Naval Acad. Inst.

M
aine State Law
​
​
GRADUATION REQUIREMENTS
Before entering high school, students need to know the standards for attaining a high school diploma in
order to plan an appropriate, sequential, educational program to meet that goal.
RSU5 is implementing a proficiency based system of learning as required by Maine law. After July 1,
2020, contingent upon Department of Education approval of Regional School Unit 5’s schedule for
implementation, the awarding of a diploma will be contingent on the demonstration of proficiency in all
of the content areas and Guiding Principles of Maine’s System of Learning Results rather than the
accumulation of credits.
To be awarded a high school diploma from Freeport High School, students graduating in the Class of
2021 and beyond must demonstrate proficiency in the content areas identified in Maine’s system of
Learning Results, meet the cross-content performance standards set forth in the Guiding Principles of the
Learning Results, and fulfill all additional graduation requirements set by the Board.
Students graduating in the Classes of 2016-2020 must meet the credit and other graduation requirements
specified in this policy.
A student who would have graduated with the Class of 2020 and have been awarded a diploma at
​​
commencement but for his/her failure to earn sufficient credits or meet other requirements set by
Board policy will have until December 31, 2020 to fulfill the graduation requirements applicable to the
Class of 2020. After December 31, 2020, those students who have not met requirements will be held
accountable to the graduation requirements of the Class of 2021.
The Superintendent, through the high school principal or other designee, shall be responsible for making
accurate information concerning diploma requirements available to incoming students and their parents
prior to the start of their ninth grade school year. A copy of this policy will be disseminated to all
incoming ninth grade students at the time of course selection. This policy will also be included in every
edition of the high school student handbook and Program of Studies.
The School Board has approved the following schedule of minimum requirements for graduation, which
includes minimum requirements specified by the State of Maine. The Board is aware that current law and
regulations are subject to change.
The School Board expects the Superintendent/designee to inform students and parents as soon as
practicable of any additional State-imposed standards that must be met before students may be awarded a
high school diploma.
9

I. DIPLOMA REQUIREMENTS FOR STUDENTS GRADUATING IN THE CLASS OF 2019
AND 2020
As a minimum for graduation from high school, students graduating in the Class of 2019 and Class of
2020 must have completed successfully a total of 24 one-year course equivalents (credits) at the
secondary level (grades 9 through 12).
Twelve and one-half (12 1⁄2) required credits are specified by the State of Maine. They are:
A. English - 4 credits;
B. Social Studies and History, including one year of American History and Government - 2 credits;
C. Mathematics - 2 credits;
D. Science, including at least one year of laboratory science
E. Fine Arts, which may include art, music, forensics or drama - 1 credit;
F. Health - 1/2 credit; and
G. Physical Education - 1 credit.
​
In addition, the Board requires the following eleven and one-half (11 1⁄2) credits:
A. One year of a world language – 1 credit;
B. Two additional years of math – 2 credits;
C. An additional one year of social studies – 1 credit;
D. Two additional years of science – 2 credits;
E. Level 1 & Level 2 PE Class
F. Five and one half elective credits – 5.5 credits
Elective credits may be selected by the student based upon the student's’ interests, abilities, and the
requirements of the field that the student plans to enter upon graduation.
In order for a student to participate in graduation, the student must have successfully completed all of the
above-listed requirements.
Alternative Means of Earning Credits
A student who is deficient in these requirements or wishes to meet these requirements through alternative
means may earn and apply credits toward graduation in accordance with the provisions of this section.
A student who wishes to meet a credit requirement through an alternative method must have prior written
approval as specified through this section. A student may earn credits with prior written approval from
his/her guidance counselor and the high school principal as follows:
A. Coursework offered through RSU5 Adult Education;
B. Credit obtained through summer school classes;
C. Credit obtained through distance learning / virtual courses;
D. Advanced courses not offered at Freeport High School at a postsecondary institution;
E. Credits obtained through independent study monitored by a Freeport High School teacher; or
10

F. Any other academic program approved by the High School Guidance and Administration.
A student who has failed a course in the above-listed requirements may, with prior approval, receive
credit for that course through a successful completion of a postgraduate course, a state approved Adult
Education course(s) or a state-approved summer school program. Credit for a marked course may also be
received for a correspondence course approved by the High School Principal in advance of registration.
The student may participate in the next regular graduation ceremony following successful completion of
the requirements.
A student who is granted early admission to an accredited college or university may use college
coursework for graduation and may thereby graduate with his/her class upon successful completion of the
course(s) needed for graduation if he/she requests and is granted permission from the high school
principal to do so. A course being used to meet high school graduation requirements must meet minimum
high school contact hour requirements and the high school’s course outcome requirements.
II. DIPLOMA REQUIREMENTS FOR STUDENTS GRADUATING IN THE CLASS OF 2021
AND BEYOND
Contingent upon Department of Education approval of RSU5’s schedule for implementation of
proficiency-based diploma requirements after July 1, 2020, the awarding of a diploma from Freeport High
School will be contingent on the demonstration of proficiency in all eight of the content areas of Maine’s
system of Learning Results and meeting the cross-content performance standards of the Guiding
Principles of the Learning Results, rather than the accumulation of credits. The student must also fulfill
any other requirements specified in this policy and set forth by the school as noted in the Program of
Studies.
Freeport High School’s educational program will be designed to enable students to satisfy graduation
requirements in four years through a sequence of educational (learning) experiences/courses providing
opportunities to gain and demonstrate proficiency in all of the content areas of the Learning Results and in
the cross-content Guiding Principles of the Learning Results.
Students who anticipate graduating in the Classes of 2021 and beyond must meet the following
requirements in order to be awarded a high school diploma:
A. Demonstrate proficiency in meeting standards in the following content areas of the Learning
Results. Meeting the standards entails demonstrating proficiency for each graduation standard
within each content area as listed in the Program of Studies.
● English Language Arts
● Mathematics
● Science and technology
● Social Studies
● Health Education and Physical Education
● Visual and Performing Arts
● World Languages
● Career and Education Development (embedded in other content areas or through
advisory)
B. Meet the cross-content performance standards set forth in the Guiding Principles
​ ​
11

of the Learning Results.
● A student graduating from RSU5 schools is expected to be a:
● Clear and effective communicator;
● Self-directed and lifelong learner;
● Creative and analytical problem solver;
● Responsible and involved citizen; and an
● Integrative and informed thinker
MULTIPLE PATHWAYS TO THE AWARDING OF A PROFICIENCY-BASED DIPLOMA
RSU5’s high school educational program is designed to enable students to satisfy graduation requirements
in four years through a sequence of courses, learning experiences or integrated equivalents providing
opportunities to gain and demonstrate proficiency in all of the content areas of the Learning Results and in
the cross-content Guiding Principles of the Learning Results.
Students following a traditional pathway will participate in a series of courses through which they will
demonstrate proficiency in each of the following areas:
A. Engage in courses in the content areas of English Language Arts, Mathematics, and
Science and Technology in each year of their high school program.
B. Engage in at least three and a half courses in the content area of Social Studies during
their high school program.
C. Engage in at least one course in the content area of Visual and Performing Arts during
their high school program.
D. Engage in at least one course in the content area of World Languages during their high
school program.
E. Engage in at least one Health and one full year Physical Education course during their
high school program.
F. Engage in courses that integrate the Guiding Principles into other content areas of the
Maine Learning Results.
G. Engage in learning experiences that address the Career and Education Development
standards.
H. Engage in learning opportunities to fulfill graduation experiences.
Students following a traditional pathway must be enrolled in the equivalent of at least 6 full year courses
in each of their high school years unless redefined through a personal learning plan, PLP, approved by
both the high school guidance department and administration.
Students may also opt to pursue a high school diploma through multiple additional pathways, including:
● Early college/dual enrollment courses
● Career and technical education programming
● Online/virtual learning
● Apprenticeships, internships and/or field work
● Community service
● Exchange programs
● Independent study
● Alternative education/“At Risk” programming
● Adult education
12

Each pathway must provide a quality learning experience comparable in rigor to the school unit’s own
course offerings.
In order to pursue one or more of the multiple/alternative pathways, a student must have a Personal
Learning Plan detailing how the pathway will provide exposure to the content standards and Guiding
Principles of the Learning Results and how the student will demonstrate proficiency in meeting the
Guiding Principles as well as the content area standards. The Personal Learning Plan must be approved by
the guidance counselor and/or other qualified faculty member/s, and the principal.
STUDENTS RECEIVING SPECIAL EDUCATION SERVICES
A student with a disability, as identified in 20-A MRSA §7001(1-B), who achieves proficiency as
required in 20-A MRSA §4722-A(1), as specified by the goals and objectives of the student’s
individualized education plan (IEP)will be awarded a diploma.
INFORMING STUDENTS AND PARENTS
The Superintendent/designee will inform students and parents as soon as practicable of any State-
imposed proficiency standards/requirements that must be met before students may be awarded a high
school diploma, but prior to the start of the class cohort’s 9th grade school year.
III. ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS APPLICABLE TO THE AWARDING OF A DIPLOMA
FROM FREEPORT HIGH SCHOOL
This section applies to all students, in all graduation classes.
A.Transfer Students
For students who transfer to Freeport High School from another state or from an educational program
that is not required to be aligned with the content standards and Guiding Principles of the system of
Learning Results, the Freeport High School Principal and Guidance Department shall determine the
value of the student’s prior educational experience towards meeting graduation requirements.
B. Home-schooled Students
For previously home-schooled students wishing to receive a diploma from Freeport High School, the
Freeport High School Principal and Guidance Department shall determine the value of the student’s
prior educational experience toward meeting graduation requirements.
C. Delayed Awarding of Diplomas
A student who leaves Freeport High School to attend an accredited, degree-granting institution of
higher education may upon satisfactory completion of the freshman year be awarded a high school
diploma, provided that the student has notified the principal at the time of the early admission.
13

D.Early Awarding of Diplomas
A student who has met the State’s and the School Board’s diploma requirements in fewer than four
years of high school will be awarded a diploma.
E. Extended Study
Students are eligible for extended years of study to complete the requirements of a diploma if they
have not reached the age of 20 at the start of the school year. Students eligible for extended years of
study may be referred to adult education or other resources suitable to young learners. Extended study
for students with disabilities shall be specified in the student’s Individualized Education Plan.
F. Certificate of Completion
The School Board may provide a certificate of completion to a student who leaves school having
completed four years attendance as a full-time high school student who has earned/completed the
required credits or courses/learning experiences but has not met Learning Results proficiency
standards that may be mandated by the State.
G.Participation in Graduation Ceremony
A student must complete all School Board requirements for a high school diploma or certificate of
completion in order to participate in graduation exercises.
H.Honors and Awards at Graduation
Student academic achievements will be grouped within numerical bands and utilized to identify,
report and reward individual accomplishments for purposes of graduation. These bands will include
three Honor Bands which will identify those graduating seniors who at the end of the 7th semester
have a Grade Point Average of:
Summa Cum Laude (with highest honors): a minimum GPA of 3.75 Magna Cum Laude (with
great honors): a minimum GPA of 3.50 Cum Laude (with honors): a minimum GPA of 3.25
Legal Reference: 20-A MRSA § 4502(8), 4722, 6209 Ch. 127 § 7 (Me. Dept. of Ed. Rule)
Adopted: February 24, 2010
Revised: December 14, 2011; June 11, 2014; January 13, 2016
Table of Contents
14

G
uiding Principles
​
21st Century Learning Expectations & Skills
Beginning with the Class of 2021, all FHS students must demonstrate proficiency in the 21st century
​
learning expectations defined by the Guiding Principles of the Maine Learning Results. The Guiding
Principles are a set of “cross curricular skills” that must be taught and demonstrated by all students to best
ensure that ALL students are career and college ready. We fundamentally believe that these principles
​ ​
should be the foundation of our educational program and, therefore, these principles will be introduced
and incorporated in various learning experiences.
The knowledge and skills described in the Maine Department of Education Regulation 132
support Maine students in achieving the goals established in Maine’s Guiding Principles. The Guiding
Principles state that each Maine student must leave school as:
A. A clear and effective communicator who:
● Demonstrates organized and purposeful communication in English and at least one other
language
● Uses evidence and logic appropriately in communication
● Adjusts communication based on the audience
● Uses a variety of modes of expression (spoken, written and visual and performing including the
use of technology to create and share the expressions)
B. A self-directed and lifelong learner who:
● Recognizes the need for information and locates and evaluates resources
● Applies knowledge to set goals and make informed decisions
● Applies knowledge in new contexts
● Demonstrates initiative and independence
● Demonstrates flexibility including the ability to learn, unlearn and relearn
● Demonstrates reliability and concern for quality
● Uses interpersonal skills to learn and work with individuals from diverse backgrounds
C. A creative and practical problem solver who:
● Observes and evaluates situations to define problems
● Frames questions, makes predictions and designs data/information collection and analysis
strategies
● Identifies patterns, trends and relationships that apply to solutions
● Generates a variety of solutions, builds a case for a best response and critically evaluates the
effectiveness of the response
● Sees opportunities, finds resources and seeks results
● Uses information and technology to solve problems
15

● Perseveres in challenging situations
D. A responsible and involved citizen who:
● Participates positively in the community and designs creative solutions to meet human needs and
wants
● Accepts responsibility for personal decisions and actions
● Demonstrates ethical behavior and the moral courage to sustain it
● Understands and respects diversity
● Displays global awareness and economic and civic literacy
● Demonstrates awareness of personal and community health and wellness
E. An integrative and informed thinker who:
● Gains and applies knowledge across disciplines and learning contexts and to real-life situations
with and without technology
● Evaluates and synthesizes information from multiple sources
● Applies ideas across disciplines
● Applies systems thinking to understand the interaction and influence of related parts on each
other and on outcomes
NOTE: Freeport High School’s proficiency-based education practices and policies are outlined in
detail in a separate document.
16

Table of Contents
G
uidance Department
​
Office of Student Services
The purpose of the Student Services Program is to actively promote the academic, emotional, and social
development of all students in ninth through twelfth grades. As an integral part of the total educational
program, developmental student services builds on the resources of an excellent faculty, positive
parent-school relationships, and a supportive community. The Office of Student Services provides
direction for positive academic, extracurricular, and vocational outcomes for all students.
A developmental and preventive approach that enhances personal well-being and self-esteem has been
designed with the understanding that it is both a process and a program. Learning experiences are
provided which foster lifelong skills and attitudes necessary for high achievement, personal self-worth,
and respect for the earth and its inhabitants.
Student Service Goals
● To provide students with services responsive to their academic, social, and emotional needs
● To enable students to learn about themselves and their relationships with others
● To coordinate with the overall school program
● To develop career awareness, academic options, and life-planning skills
● To form relationships with community agencies
● To promote early intervention and continued services for identified at-risk students
● To prepare students to apply to college, technical/vocational school, or other program
Guidance Counselor Assignments
For classes of 2020 and beyond, students are assigned to guidance counselors by last name:
A-F: Mrs. Dana Clark
G-M: Mrs. Liz Peirce
N-Z: Mrs. Alexis Rog
17

Table of Contents
P
ossible Pathways
​
If post-secondary education is desired, admission recommendations should be strongly
considered when planning the high school program. Since these recommendations vary greatly
among post-secondary schools, the best source of information is the individual college or
university website. Students should view the websites of a broad range of colleges they are
considering to make sure that they are covering the requirements. Additional reference books are
available in the Guidance Office and local bookstores.
Serious consideration is given by college admission representatives and by employers to
character, personality, work experience, and extracurricular activities. Most colleges prefer that
students pursue more challenging courses during their senior year.
FOUR-YEAR SCHOOLS HIGHLY SELECTIVE SCHOOLS
4 years of English 4 years of English
3 years of Mathematics 4 years of Mathematics
2-3 years of Laboratory Science 3-4 years of Laboratory Science
2-3 years of Social Studies 3-4 years of Social Studies
2 years of World Language 3-4 years of World Language
*Honors and Advanced Placement Courses
are strongly encouraged for most schools
TWO-YEAR PUBLIC AND PRIVATE SCHOOLS
Associate degree program recommendations vary widely, from needing a high school diploma
to satisfying recommendations similar to four-year schools.
Transfer programs usually require the same subjects as four-year schools.
VOCATIONAL SCHOOLS TECHNICAL SCHOOLS
4 years of English Recommendations differ widely. Some may
2-4 years of Mathematics include a high school diploma and physics
1-2 years of Laboratory Science plus four years of mathematics.
18

Table of Contents
A
cademic Support
​
Interventions
FHS has instituted interventions designed to ensure all students can meet increasingly rigorous academic
standards and feel supported emotionally. Some interventions are designed to increase the basic skills
necessary to succeed in a range of courses, while others are set up to create additional time and instruction
so that lessons are reinforced and extra practice moves all students toward meeting all standards.
Math and Literacy Centers
​​
The Literacy and Math Center works with students at all levels of ability. Students are assisted
individually in various writing and math tasks. Teachers assigned to the Literacy Center work with
students on assignments from all disciplines and keep copies of running assignments to maintain clarity in
directives to students. Similarly, teachers assigned to the Math Center work with students on problem sets
assigned by the students’ classroom teachers as well as remediate skills and help students prepare for
upcoming assessments. Students can schedule appointments in the Literacy and Math Centers and are
also able to come in on an impromptu, drop-in basis if time is available. Students may also be assigned by
a classroom teacher or school counselor when it has been deemed that the student requires extra support.
Callback System
The Freeport High School Callback System takes place during our advisory period on one, two or three
days of the week (depending on other scheduled events during advisory). The purpose of this program is
to ensure that all students have time built into their schedules to receive targeted support in all content
areas as well as enrichment opportunities. We have developed a system where each teacher is able to
“call back” students that they need to see during this period. A teacher may call back a student for a
number of reasons, such as:
● Additional and targeted academic instruction
● Review of work with student
● Opportunity for making up missing/absent work
● Work on/complete an assignment
Teachers select students online at the start of the week and students receive an email from the teacher that
states the day they are to meet with the teacher and the reason the student has been called back. Attending
a callback session is not optional; students are required to meet with this teacher. In addition to working
with a particular teacher, we offer enrichment opportunities for students. These may include participating
in a Student Summit to discuss a school policy, working with guidance counselors to build skills in using
the Naviance program, or attending a presentation about a particular program such as City Term or the
Peace Corps. Students who are not called back on a particular day remain in their advisory with their
advisor and have an opportunity to work on school assignments.
19

We believe that the call back system supports and encourages our students to reach their academic and
personal goals, provides time for targeted support and intervention, and gives students the opportunity to
work closely with staff members to enhance their levels of success.
Guided Study Halls
Purpose: To create a more focused, supportive and personal environment for students during the study
​​
hall period.
Placement/Enrollment:
● 9th grade students are almost always placed in guided study halls. Placement of students in
grades 10-12 depends on space availability and grades.
● Any student (or parent of a student) in a general study hall can request to be placed in a guided
study hall if there is space and the student is looking for a more structured study hall
environment.
● Students are placed in the guided study hall for a minimum of one quarter.
● Students are placed in a guided study hall for either a half period or a full period, depending on
their schedules
Response to Intervention (RTI) and SAT (Student Assistance Team)
Utilizing a variety of strategies and approaches, FHS strives to meet the needs of all learners. It is
essential that FHS has an approach that employs a system of supports that provides each student an
opportunity for both behavioral and academic success. The development of personalized academic plans
for struggling students is pivotal. These services vary in complexity based on need. The goal is to
support students in reaching academic and personal success including their grades, attendance and
behavior. Students are referred to the SAT team and to administration for potential implementation of
individualized interventions based on current academic and personal progress.
Gifted and Talented Services
Identified Gifted and Talented students at the High School level are on a consultation basis. Students will
meet with the GT teacher a minimum of twice a year to determine level of services needed to ensure for
academic success. Students may opt to meet with the GT teacher to discuss college exploration, other
outside opportunities, ways to advocate for their education, etc. The GT teacher is available for
appointments via email. The GT teacher also consults with classroom teachers to help assist in
differentiating for the GT learner's needs.
20

Table of Contents
A
dditional Support Services
​
Advisor/Advisee Program
Although FHS is a small school, it has a diverse student body with a great variety of needs: intellectual,
emotional, and social. The school offers a strong curriculum and many co-curricular activities. To
complement these aspects of school life and to ensure all students’ growth and learning, the faculty and
administration want to provide a strong support network for each individual student to help develop
interpersonal skills. Each student will benefit from having a contact person, an advisor, who is responsible
for helping him or her manage the multiple demands on time and energy.
The FHS Advisor/Advisee Program provides communication and support among students, staff and
parents through individual and group meetings. All advisors in the program are committed to helping
students:
● Understand themselves and others better
● Identify their interests and abilities
● Participate effectively in academic and co-curricular offerings
● Develop skills for lifelong learning
● Accept responsibility for their academic and personal growth in order to have a positive influence
on the school and community.
In addition to working to increase aspirations and build strong relationships with students, advisory will
be used for academic support and enrichment with their core teachers. Students will use this time for
homework, for remediation, or for extra help.
School Nurse/Health Services
The primary goal of the student health service is to promote optimal health in order to maximize each
student's ability to learn. Services include consultation and education regarding adolescent health
concerns, health appraisal and referral, disease and injury prevention and first aid. The health office is
responsible for maintaining individual student health records and often serves as a liaison between school
personnel, families and community resources. The school nurse welcomes students to drop in at any time
with questions or concerns. We ask that you notify us of any changes in your health status or emergency
contacts in order for us to provide you with appropriate service.
Social Service Worker
Social work services are provided at Freeport High School by a Licensed Clinical Social Worker, who
provides confidential counseling, referral, advocacy and facilitated family mediation and support. The
Social Worker serves as a liaison between teachers, students, and family or community providers.
Families or students in need of mental health support can access the social worker by appointment. The
21

School Social Worker is also involved in several initiatives to include Casco Bay Can, Natural Helpers,
Psycho-education related to substance use, and crisis support.
Special Education
Special Education programming is offered in all areas leading to graduation with a Freeport High School
diploma. Educational programs are specifically designed for students with appropriate support as
determined by the Individual Education Plan (I.E.P.) process.
Crisis Team
It is unfortunate, but always possible, that a crisis will occur that impacts the high school community.
Recognizing this, a team of school and community members has been formed and trained to respond to
such emergencies. The goal of the team is to facilitate a smooth and caring response in the event of a
crisis, realizing the importance of maintaining a normal school atmosphere while providing help for those
students and adults who need support. A crisis response plan includes management guidelines and
specific intervention strategies for responding to personal, school, or community emergencies that impact
the emotional and physical well-being of our students, staff, and community.
22

G
raduation Requirements
​
High School Graduation Requirements for Freeport High School
Graduation Requirements: 24 required credits to earn diploma
1. English Language Arts (4 credits)
​
2. Math (4 credits)
​
3. Science and Technology (4 credits)
​
4. Social Studies (3 credits)
​
5. Physical Education (1 credit) and Health (.5 credit)
​ ​ ​
6. Visual and Performing Arts (1 credit)
​
7. World Languages (1 credit)
​
8. Electives (5.5 credits)
​
For the Classes of 2019, 2020 and 2021, the total credits for graduation are 24. To achieve 24 credits,
students will earn credit through a passing grade in the 19 core requirements and an additional 5 elective
classes.
Minimum Enrollment for All Students
Each Freeport High School student is required to enroll in an academic program which totals a minimum
of 6 credits each year. However, it is recommended that each student enrolls in 7 classes per year.
Table of Contents
24

G
rading System
​
NOTE: Freeport High School’s proficiency-based education practices and policies are outlined in
detail in a separate document for the classes of 2021 and 2022. This document can be found on the
Freeport High School website.
For classes of 2019 and 2020: Students are graded using a 0-100 point system, and Freeport
High School does not use an accumulated grade point average or any other method to determine a rank in
class. Student academic achievements will be grouped within numerical bands and utilized to identify,
report and reward individual accomplishments for purposes of graduation. These bands will include three
Honor Bands, which will identify those graduating seniors who, at the end of the 7th semester, have a
grade point average of 84.5 to 88.4 cum laude, 88.5 to 92.5 magna cum laude, and 92.5 to 100 summa
​
cum laude.
Grade Grade Point Value 4.0 Conversion
A 93-100 3.53 - 4.0
B 85-92 3.0 - 3.47
C 77-84 2.0 - 2.88
D 70-76 1.0 - 1.86
F 0-69 0.0
H Honors n/a
HP High Pass n/a
M Merit n/a
P Pass n/a
NC No Credit n/a
W Withdraw n/a
Honor Roll for Classes of 2019 and 2020
The Freeport High School Honor Roll is published four times a year to recognize the accomplishments of
students who meet high academic standards.
25

1. Only marking period grades count toward Honor Roll, not semester or final grades.
2. Students qualify in one of two categories:
a. High Honors: All grades are 93 or better.
b. Honors: All grades are 85 or higher.
3. You must be enrolled in a minimum of six courses for each ranking period or 480 minutes per quarter
​
to qualify for the Honor Roll. No more than one class may be on a P/F grading system.
4. You are not eligible for the Honor Roll if you receive an incomplete in any course.
Once the incomplete is made up, you may receive Honor Roll distinction.
Table of Contents
26

R
egistration Process
​
The Freeport High School Program of Studies serves as a guide to all the courses that are available and
states the requirements for taking each course. Students may use this guide to plan an appropriate
academic program.
Course Registration Requirements and Information
All students must be scheduled into a minimum of six classes each semester, earning six credits per year,
that will include classes required for graduation as well as elective courses. Study halls do not earn credit.
Students registering for classes must meet the requirements specified in the subject description outlined in
the Program of Studies or receive permission from the department chairperson in consultation with the
teacher.
Pre-registration Procedure for Next Year’s Courses
The development of a student’s educational program is accomplished through close teamwork with
parents, teachers, and counselors. Course requests help the high school to meet the educational needs of
the entire student body by determining which classes are offered and how many sections are needed. It is
important to take the pre-registration process very seriously. Failure to do so may hinder students from
​ ​
getting the courses needed for graduation or for future career and educational goals.
We expect to have students register for courses they would like to take next year, in late February and
March. Juniors will register first, then Sophomores, then Freshmen. Each grade level will have an
assigned week that the powerschool portal opens to allow for course requests. Students will receive their
Course Registration Form during their assigned week, and will meet with their current teachers for their
recommendations. Teachers and Parents will need to sign off on the student’s Course Registration Form
requests. Students will be able to register online in powerschool, and are encouraged to meet with their
guidance counselor during their registration week, for support with course selection.
Please note that as you request elective courses, you are asked to identify “alternative choices.” FHS may
not run some electives due to a low number of requests or due to budgetary constraints.
After the Master Schedule is developed, students will be given a copy of their schedule before leaving
school for the summer. In instances where a course was requested but will not be offered, or a conflict
exists, the counselor will assist the student in making an alternative selection before the student’s
schedule is finalized.
27

Planning for College or Technical School
If you intend to continue your education in college or vocational-technical school, you must plan your
program accordingly. Most colleges and technical schools require at least Algebra 1 and Geometry
(Algebra 2 and Advanced Math are needed for many programs). Many colleges require at least 2 years of
the same Foreign Language. Two (preferably three) years of lab science are required for most colleges
and vocational programs. Refer to the recommended sequence of courses for post-secondary education in
the next section.
9th Grade Placement
The selection criteria for each subject is based on your child's 8th grade teacher’s recommendation;
Spring Grade 8 NWEA report that indicates your child’s achievement level; and end-of-year grades in
each 8th grade course. We believe this process gives the most accurate information and will result in a
smooth and successful transition to high school.
Honors Course Placement Policy
Prerequisites are utilized in the recommendation process to insure that students have acquired sufficient
mastery of material that will be needed in the next level course. Students who do not receive the grade
necessary to meet the prerequisite may still be recommended for the next level course if the teacher, in
consultation with the department chair, feels that, regardless of the grade, the student has the skills and
commitment to be successful in the next course. As a general guideline, in order to receive an honors
recommendation for the next level:
● A student presently in an honors level course should have a solid academic standing and
demonstrate a high level of consistent effort and motivation.
● A student who is presently in a college prep level course must be highly motivated, have an A
average or higher in their present college prep course, and receive a teacher recommendation.
● They must also have a willingness to complete additional work (if needed) to get caught up to the
honors curriculum.
Enrollment in Honors or Advanced Placement (AP) courses will be limited to students who meet the
specified department criteria. Their current subject teachers must recommend students for these courses.
The expectations in these courses are high in terms of quality of work, time and participation. Some
Honors or Advanced Placement courses may also require summer work. Taking the AP Exam is
mandatory for any student taking an AP course. Students taking an AP course will be expected to pay the
AP Exam registration fee. There is a registration fee per AP course, so students taking multiple exams
will have multiple exams to register and pay for. If for some reason a student does not take the AP Exam,
the AP designation will be removed from the course title.
Table of Contents
28

C
ourse Planning & Sequencing
​
We suggest that each family, working closely with their child and their child’s guidance counselor,
develop a tentative four year program that will meet the graduation requirements, challenge the student,
and accommodate his/her interests. This program should be reviewed prior to preliminary course
registration for the following year, in order to determine if it is still appropriate. Beginning with the 9th
grade, progress toward graduation depends upon the accumulation of credits. Students’ programs are
reviewed to make certain that each student will have adequate credits to progress with his/her class.
Meeting Requirements is the Responsibility of Each Student and His/Her Parent(s)/Guardian(s). Students
should know their credit total to date and be certain that they have sufficient credits for graduation. A
student may request to graduate early if he/she has met the graduation requirements.
Below is a guideline for the general sequencing of a four-year plan in most core academic areas.
Your customized four-year plan may vary from the examples below, as there are many potential
course sequence pathways. These are just some examples of typical pathways.
English - 4 minimum credits for graduation
Grade 9th 10th 11th 12th
Option 1 English - 9 English - 10 English-11 OR 2 English 12 semester
AP Language OR courses
AP Literature OR AP Language OR AP
Literature
Mathematics - 4 minimum credits for graduation
Grade 9th 10th 11th 12th
Option 1 Pre-Algebra Algebra I, Part I Algebra I, Part 2 Geometry OR Consumer Math
Option 2 Algebra 1, Part Algebra 1, Part Geometry Algebra 2
1 2
Option 3 Algebra 1 Geometry Algebra 2 Pre-Calculus
Option 4 Geometry Algebra 2 Pre-Calculus Calculus OR
AP Calculus OR
AP Statistics
Option 5 Algebra 2 Pre-Calculus Calculus OR College-level math course such as
AP Calculus OR Differential Equations, Linear Algebra,
AP Statistics Multivariable Calc
29

Science - 4 minimum credits for graduation
Grade 9th 10th 11th 12th
Option 1 Earth Systems Biology (CP or Chemistry (CP or Chemistry (CP or Honors) OR
Science (CP or honors) Honors) OR Environmental Science OR
honors) Environmental Science Anatomy and Physiology OR
OR Anatomy and CSI I/ CSI II OR Physics OR AP
Physiology OR CSI I/ Biology OR Physics OR AP
CSI II OR Physics OR Physics OR
AP Biology OR Physics AP Environmental Science
OR AP Physics OR
AP Environmental
Science
*Courses in 11th and 12th grade will depend on teacher recommendation and course prerequisite
completion.
*STEM electives available for grades 9-12
*Class of 2021 and beyond will be required to take Chemistry and Physics
Social Studies - 3 minimum credits for graduation
Grade 9th 10th 11th 12th
Option 1 Global Studies Western Studies US History Elective OR
AP US History
Option 2 Global Studies Western Studies AP US History AP World History
Table of Contents
30

C
ourse Add/Drop Process
​
Request for Schedule Change/Course Changes & the ADD/DROP Period
Students will be issued schedules based on their selections as reflected on their course registration sheets.
Every effort will be made to satisfy student requests, student needs, and parent and teacher
recommendations. Students will be encouraged and given every opportunity to discuss their choices with
teachers, advisors, parents, and school counselors before they leave for the summer.
There are two add/drop periods per school year; one at the beginning of the first semester, and one at the
beginning of the second semester. Students will be required to obtain an add/drop form in the Guidance
Office in order to request a course change. Students must then conference with the current course teacher,
the new course teacher, and a parent/guardian, and receive signatures of approval from all parties. Then
the Guidance Office will issue final approval and make the course change in powerschool.
The conclusion of the first two (2) weeks at the beginning of semester one and the conclusion of the first
​ ​
(1) week of semester two will mark the end of the add-drop period. After these dates, each schedule
​ ​
change request initiated by students or parents will require discussion among all parties and will be
judged on its own merits with the best interest of the student in mind. In some cases, a student, teacher,
parent and counselor conference may be required. If all parties make a concerted effort to choose
appropriate classes at the recommended level, most schedule changes, which can be disruptive, will be
avoided.
Appropriate Reasons for a Schedule Change:
-To strengthen the program by adding a subject or moving to a different program
-Failure of a preceding course in a sequence
-Successful completion of a course during summer school
-Recommendation from either the IEP Team or Administration
-Teacher recommendation
-Student request with approval of teacher, counselor, and parent
Inappropriate Reasons for a Schedule Change:
-To change from one teacher to another in the same subject
-To be with friends
-To free up either the afternoon or the morning
Table of Contents
31

C C
ourse atalog
​ ​
​ ​
32

E
nglish Department
​
English 9 (CP) Year 1 credit Prerequisite: none
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement
The ninth grade English course provides an introduction to high school reading and writing, and requirements of
the portfolio. The course focuses on composition, vocabulary, and study skills through the study of world
literature. Frequent writing assignments include journals, discussion questions, short and long essays, as well as
creative pieces, all in response to the reading. Students extend their understanding of the poetry, short stories,
and dramatic texts by presenting projects which require interdisciplinary work with Global Studies.
English 9 (Honors) Year 1 credit Prerequisite: Determined from Spring
​
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement Grade 8 NWEA, academic achievement,
and teacher recommendation
Honors English 9 offers students enrichment and challenge in the study of English. Participants will demonstrate
a commitment to go beyond the English 9 curriculum and reach a higher level of achievement in all work.
Honors English 9 will cover the regular course assignments in more depth and breadth. Students will read
additional literary works, write more extensively developed essays, engage in extended vocabulary study, and
complete supplemental individual and/or group projects.
English 9 (Focus) Year 1 credit Prerequisite:Determined from Spring
​
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement Grade 8 NWEA, academic achievement,
and teacher recommendation only
The Focus 9 program has been designed with the intention of effectively introducing and preparing students for
high school level work. Students will improve basic literacy and academic skills, develop self-discipline, engage
creativity and advance inherent strengths. The ultimate goal is to have students be able to take advantage of
further academic opportunities and to stay on track for successful completion of a high school course of studies.
Literacy I Year .5 credit Prerequisite: Grade 8 and/or Grade 9 test
​
data and academic achievement identifies
a student as struggling with grade level
literacy skills
Students take this course in addition to their regular English 9 course. Students will receive direct instruction in
reading strategies and writing skills. Multiple opportunities to write and analyze texts will allow students to
explore topics of interest while building literacy skills for success across the high school curriculum.
English 10 (CP) Year 1 credit Prerequisite: English 9
​
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement
Tenth grade English provides an integrated balance of traditional and standards-based content, instruction, and
assessment. Classes promote the practice and demonstration of skills and knowledge found in the Common
Core English/Language Arts standards as well as additional instruction in general reading, writing, research,
listening, and speaking skills. When appropriate, students have choices related to content and assessment while
retaining full academic rigor. Units are designed based on essential questions that connect learning with larger
societal issues: deviation from social norms, the relationship between knowledge and happiness, and the role of
authority.
33

English 10 (Honors) Year 1 credit Prerequisite: Determined from Spring
​
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement Grade 8 NWEA, academic achievement,
and teacher recommendation
This course focuses on developing the skills of literary and rhetorical analysis through close readings of literary
fiction and informational texts. Students regularly produce pieces of persuasive, creative, and narrative writing,
while also developing skills of oral expression through performance, debate and discussion. Works studied may
include One Flew Over the Cuckoo’s Nest, Macbeth, Antigone, contemporary short fiction and poetry.
​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​
English 11: American Literature Year 1 credit Prerequisite: English 10
​
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement
In this year-long, one credit course, students will read a variety of texts (novels, non-fiction, poetry, and
journalism) that define or shed light on the "American character." These texts will illuminate America's
achievements, its controversies, and its contradictions, and may include works (in whole or in part) such as
Mark Twain's The Adventure of Huckleberry Finn, Robert Heinlein's The Moon is a Harsh Mistress, Toni
​ ​ ​ ​
Morrison's Beloved or The Bluest Eye, F Scott Fitzgerald's The Great Gatsby, Tony Horwitz's Confederates in
​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​
the Attic, Barbara Ehrenreich's Nickel and Dimed, and Willa Cather's My Antonia, as well as poetry by Emily
​ ​ ​ ​ ​
Dickinson, Walt Whitman, Robert Frost, and Gwendolyn Brooks. Students will write in a variety of genres in
response to literature and to events in American society. The year's major writing emphasis will feature
argumentation supported by research, but students will also write expository essays and a variety of pieces in
different genres.
AP English Language & Composition Year 1 credit Prerequisite: English 10 or English 11
​
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement
The AP English Language and Composition course is designed to help students become skilled readers of prose
written in a variety of periods, disciplines, and rhetorical contexts and to become skilled writers who can
compose arguments for a number of purposes. Through their reading and writing in this course, students become
aware of the interactions among a writer’s purposes, audience expectations, and subjects that contribute to
effective composition. Writing assignments will include informal writing such as journal entries and creative
pieces, but will focus more fully on students' critical and interpretive responses to, and composition of, rhetoric.
The course reading list includes non-fiction (such as memoirs, speeches, essays, and editorials), and literature of
various genres and time periods. Summer work is required for entry into the class in September. Students taking
​
this course are required to take the AP exam in the spring.
AP English Literature & Composition Year 1 credit Prerequisite: English 10 or English 11
​
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement
This course is devoted to in-depth analysis and interpretation of complex literary works. Students produce
analytical writing of various sorts including close reading, poetry explications, character analyses, and blog
entries. Personal narratives and creative responses are also a component of the written expression required in
this class. Works studied may include Beowulf, Hamlet, Beloved, Heart of Darkness, The Stranger, A Streetcar
​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​
Named Desire, The Awakening, and more. Summer work is required for entry into the class in September.
​ ​ ​
Students taking this course are required to take the AP exam in the spring.
English-12: Literacy Semester .5 credit Prerequisite: English 11 or an AP Class
​
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement
34

This semester long comprehensive English class combines traditional content with standards-based teaching
practices. The class will place a special emphasis on the role of media (print, music, motion pictures, internet,
​
etc.) as it connects to specific themes such as coolness, freedom of speech, survival in a harsh world, or sports
journalism. Students will write narrative and analysis essays and will be exposed to a variety of texts including
essays, articles, editorials, poetry, documentaries, political cartoons, photographs and paintings as well as
novels.
English-12: Composition Semester .5 credit Prerequisite: English 11 or an AP Class
​
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement
In this semester long course, students will learn about and apply writing related to a wide variety of genres and
purposes. Students will improve their argumentative writing in preparation for post-secondary education, but
students will also have significant choice related to the genres and purposes of writing. Student choice could
include, but would not be limited to, sports journalism, fashion writing, grant and business writing, arts criticism
or reviews (movies, CDs, dance, painting, theater, etc), outdoor/adventure writing, and editorial writing.
Students will also read and respond to a variety of texts such as editorials, reviews, novels, and essays to learn
genre elements, consider style elements, and explore literary themes and trends in culture.
English-12: Creative Writing Semester .5 credit Prerequisite: English 11 or an AP Class
​
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement
This semester-long course is designed for students who wish to expand upon writing already done in the regular
English classroom. Students will produce works of fiction and nonfiction. The process of writing will be a focus
with students working through a series of drafts to produce polished, publishable pieces. Techniques in topic
generation, revision, editing and responding to the works of others will be covered. As a community of writers,
students will be expected to share work and contribute to The Clarion.
​ ​
English-12: Public Speaking Semester .5 credit Prerequisite: English 11 or an AP Class
​
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement
This course provides instruction and practice in the preparation and delivery of speeches within a welcoming
and lively classroom setting. Students will learn how to research, outline, and deliver short, informal
presentations, as well as longer speeches. Students will also sharpen their skills in critical listening. Upon
completion, students will be able to prepare and deliver well-organized speeches and demonstrate the speaking
skills necessary to be effective communicators in academic settings, in the workplace, and in the community.
Although some (many) might find the thought of public speaking terrifying, the rewards for acquiring these
skills are enormous.
English-12: Skills I & II Semester .5 credit Prerequisite: By teacher or guidance
​
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement recommendation only
This semester long comprehensive English class focuses on skills needed for students to graduate and succeed
beyond high school. Students are given a variety of supports to practice and hone their skills in reading, writing,
speaking and listening. Units are based on essential questions that relate to current, relevant topics and students
are allowed to choose many of the topics for reading and writing. Students will be exposed to a variety of texts
including essays, articles, editorials, poetry, documentaries, political cartoons, photographs and paintings as well
as novels. Some students will be given alternative ways to show their learning in this class.
35

Media and Social Media Studies Semester .5 credit Prerequisite: Open to 9th-12th graders
● Elective Credit
This class will examine current trends in “the media”. We will will look at how information from the “media” is
delivered differently than in the past and how social media plays a role in informing the public. We will look at
such mediums as film (documentaries), podcasts, blogs, and both electronic and print sources. In addition, we
will examine how social media has changed what it means to be a “journalist.” Do we all have the potential to
be “journalists” in today’s age of technology? After taking this class, students will be better consumers of
media. We may also re-create what we study by producing media for the Freeport High School community in
The Falcon Outlet. This could include the creation of blogs, podcasts, and even the the production of
live-streaming Freeport events (such as sports, performances, meetings, etc.).
Desktop Publishing Year 1 credit Prerequisite: Open to 11th-12th graders
● Elective Credit
This course is designed to give motivated and deadline-oriented students an opportunity to work on the
publication of the yearbook. They will be involved in every aspect of the page layout, editing, advertising, sales,
and distribution of the school’s yearbook. Students will take photos of and interview the student body, as well as
attend photographic opportunities during and after school. This course allows students to work independently
and in small groups. It gives students a chance to use their creative and organizational skills to produce a record
of their school life that will be seen by their community. Students will develop a strong working knowledge of a
web-based design and publishing program.
Senior Seminar Semester .5 credit Prerequisite: Open only to 12th Graders
● Elective Credit
This semester-long elective course provides students with essential strategies necessary for surviving
independently. Among the topics covered are how not to be a victim, career impacts on lifestyle, finding a place
to live, understanding leases and contracts, managing money and becoming an active citizen. Guest speakers
will be presenting on various topics including the School Resource Officer, bank representatives and others.
Table of Contents
36

H
ealth & Physical Education Department
​
P
hysical Education Courses
​
Unified Physical Education Semester .5 credit Prerequisite: None
​
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement
Unified Physical Education provides a unique opportunity for students with and without disabilities to come
together through ongoing educational and physical activities, using the power of Special Olympics. The Unified
Physical Education course is structured around the national physical education standards and grade-level
outcomes. Additionally, the class supports the development of leadership skills for all students as well as the
empowerment of ALL students to foster an inclusive class and school-wide environment. Students in Unified
Physical Education courses may have the opportunity to participate in competitions with other schools or
attend Special Olympics events.
EXCITE - Level 1 Semester .5 credit Prerequisite: None
​
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement
This course will incorporate a variety of health enhancing physical activities. The activities are non-sport
oriented and non-competitive. Fitness workouts may include yoga, circuit training, weight training, cooperative
and team building games and a variety of outdoor activities.
Outdoor Fitness - Level 1 Semester .5 credit Prerequisite: None
​
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement
This course will introduce students to the skills needed to ensure that outdoor adventures remain fun,
challenging and safe. Outdoor activities include hiking, snowshoeing, camping, orienteering, and basic first aid.
This course requires 2 full day field trips. The course will also stress environmental awareness. This class can be
​
taken as an Independent Study.
Team and Life Sports - Level 1 Semester .5 credit Prerequisite: None
​
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement
This course provides supportive opportunities for a variety of physical activities that enhance the physical,
mental, social, and emotional health of the student. The curriculum is broken into two portions: 1) the physical
fitness components of cardiovascular endurance, muscular strength, muscular endurance, and flexibility 2) the
activity component includes lifelong recreational activities as well as competitive activities. Examples of
offerings are: tennis, archery, Frisbee, badminton, basketball, volleyball, soccer, and pickleball.
Foundations of Fitness - Level 2 Semester .5 credit Prerequisite: Completion of a Level 1
​
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement
Students gain knowledge of personal fitness concepts through class work and participation in a variety of
fitness-based activities. Students develop and implement an individual fitness program including a
cardiovascular, flexibility and weight training component. Principles of exercise, nutrition, and the areas of
fitness will be explored. This course encourages each student to develop a fit and healthy lifestyle.
37

Weight Training - Level 2 Semester .5 credit Prerequisite: Completion of a Level 1
​
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement
This course is designed for individuals who are interested in improving their own level of fitness. Students will
acquire the knowledge needed to design and implement a personal weight training program. Cardiovascular
exercise, plyometrics and other fitness enhancing activities are incorporated. This course is recommended for
students who are self-motivated and eager to improve their level of fitness. Students will self- assess throughout
the semester and exercise programs will be adjusted for optimal success.
Intro to Weight Training - Level 2 Semester .5 credit Prerequisite: Completion of a Level 1
​
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement
This course is designed for students who are interested in improving their own level of fitness in a supportive
environment. Students in this course may not be familiar or comfortable with the weight room equipment.
Students will acquire the knowledge needed to design and implement a personal weight training program.
Cardiovascular exercise, plyometrics and other fitness enhancing activities are incorporated. This course is
recommended for students who are looking to improve their level of fitness in a supportive environment.
Students will self- assess throughout the semester and exercise programs will be adjusted for optimal success.
Women’s Fitness and Self Defense - Semester .5 credit Prerequisite: Completion of a Level 1 and
​
Level 2 Grades 11-12
● Fulfills a Graduation Requirement
This course will include self-defense technique training important to the safety of all women. Students will
actualize their own physical power and dependence on themselves for protection. This will be accompanied
with the ability to recognize and reduce risk in everyday situations. This class will also include a component
targeted to improve fitness in a challenging and supportive environment. Students will participate in a variety of
fitness-based activities and gain knowledge of the impact on their health.
Physical Education Leadership Semester .5 credit Prerequisite: Teacher Approval
​
● Elective
Through the physical education leadership program, students have the opportunity to develop leadership skills
by direct assistance to the physical education staff. Student Leaders will be expected to become familiar with
equipment, safety procedures, learn rules and officiate with each activity. Student Leaders will be able to assist
with or conduct large group games and warm up activities to develop voice and leadership qualities essential to
working with large groups of people.
Fitness Lab Semester .5 credit Prerequisite: None
​
● Elective
The fitness lab is an opportunity for students to advance their personal health and fitness. The Fitness Lab will
help students develop individualized personal training programs to meet health and fitness goals. Students will
work with the Lab Instructor to select daily and weekly cardiovascular and muscular activities to meet these
goals. The Fitness Lab has cardio and weight training equipment for all levels and abilities, including treadmill,
elliptical machines, spin bikes, free weights and weight machines.
After School Fitness Lab Semester .5 credit Prerequisite: None
​
● Elective
Students will earn elective credit for attending 45 hours (approximately 2-3 days per week) of the Fitness Lab
after school. Students will sign in each day to track hours. The fitness lab is an opportunity for students to
38