SOURCE: https://www.rsu5.org/fs/resource-manager/view/5ed198c5-7114-4165-aa53-802a098c2f8f
SECTION: /board-of-directors-and-policies/board-committees/standing-committees/policy-committee
TITLE: December 8, 2022 Agenda
TYPE: Finalsite-PDF
============================================================

“To inspire and support every learner by challengingminds, building character, sparking creativity, and nurturing passions.”
Jean Skorapa, Superintendent of Schools Cynthia Alexander, Assistant Superintendent of Schools
Peggy Brown, Interim Director of Finance & Human Resources June Sellers, Ed.D., Director of Instructional Support
TO: Colin Cheney, Candy deCsipkes, Maddy Vertenten
CC: Jennifer Winkler
FROM: Cynthia Alexander
DATE: December 6, 2022
RE: Policy Meeting – December 8, 2022
The Policy Committee is scheduled to meet on Thursday, December 8, 2022 at 7:30 a.m. via Zoom at
the following link: https://networkmaine.zoom.us/j/88179232220Meeting ID: 881 7923 2220 or join by
telephone at 1-646-876-9923
Agenda
Policy JLCD - Administration of Medication to Students
17 West Street Freeport, ME 04032 · 207-865-0928

NEPN/NSBA Code: JLCD
ADMINISTRATION OF MEDICATION TO STUDENTS
The intent of this policy is to promote the safe administration of medications to students by
trained school personnel. The Board discourages the administration of medication to students
during the school day when other options exist, but recognizes that in some instances it may be
necessary for a student to have medication administered to them while the student is in
attendance at school. The school will not deny educational opportunities to students requiring the
administration of medication in order to remain in attendance and participate in the educational
program.
Medications will only be administered to students by trained school personnel. This policy
provides exceptions for authorization of student emergency self-administration of medication.
This policy does not apply to medical marijuana, which is addressed in RSU No. 5 Board’s policy
JLCDA, Medical Marijuana in Schools.
The Board encourages collaboration between parents and the schools in matters involving
student medication.
The Board disclaims any and all responsibility for the diagnosis, prescription of treatment, and
administration of medication for any student, and for any injury arising from a student’s self-
administration of medication.
I. DEFINITIONS
“Administration” means the provision of prescribed medication to a student according to
the orders of a healthcare provider.
“Collaborative practice agreement” means a written and signed agreement between a
physician licensed in Maine or a school health advisor, as defined in 20-A MRSA §6402-
A, and a school nurse. Such an agreement can provide for the prescription of epinephrine
autoinjectors by the physician or school health advisor and administration of epinephrine
injectors by the school nurse or designated school personnel to students during school or
a school-sponsored activity under emergency circumstances involving anaphylaxis, or
and, as defined in 20-A MRSA §6307, provide for the prescription of naloxone by the
physician or school health advisor and the administration of naloxone by the school nurse
or designated school personnel to students, staff, or visitors during school or a school-
sponsored activity or otherwise on school grounds under emergency circumstances
involving an opioid overdose or apparent opioid overdose.
“Designated school personnel” are unlicensed school personnel who have completed such
training in administration of medication as may be required by Maine statutes or DOE
rules, and who have been authorized by the school nurse to administer medication.
“Health care provider” means a medical/health practitioner who has a current license in
the State of Maine with a scope of practice that includes prescribing medication.
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 1 of 8

NEPN/NSBA Code: JLCD
“Indirect supervision” means the supervision of an unlicensed school staff member when
the school nurse or other health care provider is not physically available on site, but
immediately available by telephone.
“Individual Health Plan” means a plan developed by the school nurse, student and family
to provide care coordination and facilitate the management of the student’s health
condition in the school setting and to inform school educational plans.
“Medication” means prescribed drugs and medical devices that are controlled by the U.S.
Food and Drug Administration and are ordered by a healthcare provider. It includes over-
the-counter medications prescribed through a standing order by the school physician or
prescribed by the student’s health care provider. For the purpose of this policy,
“medication” includes asthma inhalers, epinephrine autoinjectors, naloxone
hydrochloride, and medication related to the management of insulin dependent diabetes
but does not include medical marijuana.
“Parent” means a natural or adoptive parent, a guardian, or a person acting as a parent of
a child with legal responsibility for the child’s welfare.
“School nurse” means a registered professional nurse with Maine Department of
Education certification for school nursing.
“Self-administration” is when the student administers medication independently to
themself/themselves under indirect supervision of the school nurse.
“Unlicensed school personnel” are persons who do not have a professional license that
allows them, within the scope of that license, to administer medication.
II. ADMINISTRATION OF MEDICATION BY SCHOOL PERSONNEL
A. Parental Request
In the event that no reasonable alternative exists, the parent may request in writing
that medication be administered to the student during the school day. The written
request must include an acknowledgement and agreement that unlicensed
personnel may administer the medication as per the health care provider’s
instructions. In addition, the request shall indicate that information regarding the
student’s medication may be shared with appropriate school personnel. Parents
may provide the reason (diagnosis) requiring the administration of medication.
Requests shall be valid for the current school year only.
B. Health Care Provider’s Order
All parental requests must be accompanied by a written order from the student’s
Health Care Provider substantiating the fact that the administration of a particular
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 2 of 8

NEPN/NSBA Code: JLCD
medication during the school day is necessary for the student’s health and
attendance in school. Such order must include the:
1. Student’s name
2. Name of the medication
3. Dose
4. Route of administration (e.g., tablets, liquid, drops)
5. Time intervals for administration (e.g., every four hours, before meals)
6. Special instructions; and
7. Name of the prescribing Health Care Provider
It is the responsibility of the school nurse to clarify any medication order that they
believe to be inappropriate or ambiguous. In accordance with Department of
Education Rule Chapter 40 § 2(B), the school nurse may decline to administer a
medication if they believe such administration would jeopardize student
safety. In this case, the school nurse must notify the parent, the student’s health
care provider and the school administrator (i.e., building principal or designated
administrator).
If the student’s parent or health care provider indicates that they do not want a
medication administered by unlicensed personnel, a meeting or telephone
conference will be held involving the school nurse, the building administrator, the
parent(s), and appropriate professionals to discuss alternative options for
administration of medication to the student.
C. Renewal of Parent Permission Requests/Forms and Health Care Provider Orders
Written parental permission requests/forms and health care provider orders must
be renewed at least annually. Health care provider orders must be renewed
whenever there are changes in the order.
D. Delivery and Storage of Medication
The student’s parents shall deliver any medication to be administered by school
personnel to the school in its original container and properly labeled. In the event
that this is not practical, the parent must contact the school to make alternate
arrangements. The parent is responsible for the replenishment of medication kept
at school.
The school nurse or authorized designee is responsible for accepting and properly
storing all medications. No more than a 20-day (one month) supply of medication
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 3 of 8

NEPN/NSBA Code: JLCD
shall be kept at school, excluding inhalers and epinephrine autoinjectors. The
parent is responsible for the replenishment of medication kept at school.
If the health care provider’s order/prescription is for a medication regulated by
Schedule II of the Controlled Substances Act (21 USC §812) (e.g., Ritalin and
Adderall) no more than a one week supply shall be kept at school.
Scheduled medications (regulated by the Federal Narcotics Act) will not be
accepted at school unless it is part of a student’s Individual Health Plan agreed
upon by the physician, parent, school nurse and administrator.
The parent is responsible for notifying the school of any changes in or
discontinuation of a prescribed medication that is being administered to the
student at school. The parent must remove any medication no longer required or
that remains at the end of the school year. Any medication remaining will be
appropriately discarded by the school nurse.
The school nurse in conjunction with principal and/or designated school official
shall be responsible for developing and implementing procedures for the
appropriate and secure storage of medications kept at school, and all medications
shall be stored in accordance with this procedure.
E. Recordkeeping
School personnel and the student’s parent shall account for all medication brought
to school. The number of capsules, pills, tablets, and/or volume of scheduled
medications brought to school shall be recorded.
School staff administering medication shall document each instance the
medication is administered including the date, time, and dosage given.
The school nurse shall maintain a record including the parent’s request,
physician’s order, details of the specific medications (including dosage and timing
of medication), and documentation of each instance the medication is
administered.
Records shall be retained according to the current State of Maine schedules
pertaining to student health records.
F. Confidentiality
To the extent legally permissible, staff members may be provided with such
information regarding medication and its administration as may be in the best
interest of the student.
G. Administration of Medication
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 4 of 8

NEPN/NSBA Code: JLCD
Medication may be administered during the school day by licensed medical
personnel acting within the scope of their licenses.
The school nurse, under the administrative supervision of the Superintendent, will
provide direction and oversight for the administration of medication to students.
All unlicensed personnel (principals, teachers, education technicians, school
secretaries, coaches, bus drivers, etc.) who administer medication must receive
training before being authorized to do so.
Based upon the documentation of training and competency in the administration
of medication, the school nurse will communicate to the Superintendent/designee
pertaining to authorization of unlicensed persons to administer
medication. Training that shall be acceptable for the purpose of authorization of
unlicensed personnel is addressed under the section of this policy titled “Required
Training of Unlicensed Personnel to Administer Medication.”
H. Administration of Medication During Off-Campus Field Trips and School-
Sponsored Events
The school will accommodate students requiring administration of medication
during field trips or school-sponsored events as follows:
The school nurse, principal, and, as appropriate, the school unit’s Section 504
Coordinator and/or IEP, will determine whether an individual student’s
participation is contraindicated due to the unstable/fragile nature of their health
condition, the distance from emergency care that may be required, and/or other
extraordinary circumstances. The student’s parent and primary care provider will
be consulted in making this determination. The decision will be made in
compliance with applicable laws, including the IDEA, § 504 and the Americans
with Disabilities Act (ADA).
The parent must provide the appropriate number of doses needed for the duration
of the field trip or school-sponsored event.
When there are no contraindications to student participation, an appropriately
trained staff member will be assigned to administer medication. The parent will
be encouraged to accompany the student, if possible, to care for the student and
administer medication.
All provisions of this policy shall apply to medications to be administered during
off-campus field trips and school-sponsored events. As practicable, the DOE’s
“Procedure for Medication Administration on School Field Trips” will be
followed.
I. Student Self-Administration of Asthma Inhalers, Epinephrine Autoinjectors and
medication related to the care of insulin dependent diabetes.
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 5 of 8

NEPN/NSBA Code: JLCD
Students with allergies or asthma or type one diabetes may be authorized by the
building principal, in consultation with the school nurse, to possess and self-
administer emergency medication from an epinephrine autoinjector or asthma
inhaler during the school day, during field trips, school-sponsored events, or while
on a school bus. The student shall be authorized to possess and self-administer
medication from an epinephrine autoinjector, asthma inhaler or medication related
to the care of their insulin dependent diabetes if the following conditions have
been met:
1. The parent (or student, if 18 years of age or older) provides a written
request for the student to possess and self-administer medication from an
epinephrine autoinjector or asthma inhaler.
2. The student must have the prior written approval from their primary
health care provider and, if the student is under the age of 18, the prior
written approval of their parent. The written notice from the student’s
primary care provider must specify the name and dosage of the
medication, frequency with which it may be administered, and the
circumstances that may warrant its use.
3. The student’s parent must submit written verification to the school from
the student’s primary care health provider confirming that the student has
the knowledge and the skills to safely possess and use an epinephrine
auto-injector or asthma inhaler.
4. The school nurse shall evaluate the student’s technique to ensure proper
and effective use of an epinephrine auto-injector or asthma inhaler taking
into account the maturity and capability of the student and the
circumstances under which the student will or may have to self-administer
the medication.
5. The parent will be informed that the school cannot accurately monitor
the frequency and appropriateness of use when the student self-
administers medication, and that the school unit will not be responsible for
any injury arising from the student’s self-medication.
Authorization granted to a student to possess and self-administer Emergency
Medication for Asthma, Anaphylaxis and Diabetes shall be valid for the current
school year only and must be renewed annually.
A student’s authorization to possess and self-administer these medications may be
limited or revoked by the building principal after consultation with the school
nurse and the student’s parents if the student demonstrates inability to responsibly
possess and self-administer such medication.
To the extent legally permissible, staff members may be provided with such
information regarding the student’s medication and the student’s self-
administration as may be in the best interest of the student.
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 6 of 8

NEPN/NSBA Code: JLCD
Sharing, borrowing, or distribution of medication is prohibited. The student’s
authorization to self-administer medication may be revoked and the student may
be subject to disciplinary consequences for violation of this policy.
J. Administration of Over-the-Counter Medications
With prior written parent permission, students may receive certain over the
counter medications at school, e.g., Tylenol, Ibuprofen, Tums, cough drops, etc.
pursuant to a standing order from the school physician/school health advisor.
K. Required Training of Unlicensed Personnel to Administer Medication
Unlicensed school personnel who administer medication to students in a school
setting (at school, on school transportation to or from school, on field trips, or
during school-sponsored events) must be trained in the administration of
medication before being authorized to carry out this responsibility. Such training
must be provided by a registered professional nurse or physician and include the
components specified in Department of Education Rules Chapter 40 and other
applicable Department of Education standards, recommendations, programs,
and/or methodologies.
The trainer shall document the training and competency of unlicensed school
personnel to administer medication. Based upon a review of the documentation
of training and competency in the administration of medication, the school nurse
will communicate recommendations to the Superintendent/designee pertaining to
authorization of such unlicensed personnel pertaining to authorization to
administer medication.
Following the initial training, a training review and information update must be
held at least annually for those unlicensed school personnel authorized to
administer medication.
L. Delegation and Implementation
The Superintendent/designee shall be responsible for developing administrative
procedures and/or protocols to implement or supplement this policy.
Such procedures/protocols shall include direction regarding:
1. Safe transport of medication to and from school;
2. Administration of medication during field trips and school-sponsored
events;
3. Accountability for medications, particularly those regulated by
Schedule II of the Controlled Substances Act;
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 7 of 8

NEPN/NSBA Code: JLCD
4. Proper storage of medication at school;
5. Training of appropriate staff on administration of emergency
medications including the standards for the signs and symptoms of
anaphylaxis and the use of epinephrine auto-injectors for students with
known anaphylaxis allergies.
6.The procedure to follow in the event of a medication reaction;
7. Access to medications in case of a disaster;
8. The process for documenting medications given and medication errors;
and
9. The proper disposal of medications not retrieved by parents.
Legal Reference: 20-A M.R.S.A. §§ 254(5); 4009(4); 4502 (5)(N); 6305
Me. Dept. of Ed. Rule Ch. 40 (2016)
21 USC §801 et.seq. (Controlled Substances Act)
28 C.F.R. Part 35 (Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990)
34 C.F.R. Part 104 (Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973)
34 C.F.R. Part 300 (Individuals with Disabilities Education Act)
Cross Reference: JLCD-E – Medication Administration on School Field Trips
(Me. DOE)
JLCDA – Medical Marijuana in Schools
Adopted: July 8, 2009
Revised: December 8, 2010
Revised: May 24, 2017
Revised: November 30, 2022
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 8 of 8