SOURCE: https://www.rsu5.org/fs/resource-manager/view/f9c3001c-5e00-4046-b9c1-939716b70d9f
SECTION: /board-of-directors-and-policies/board-of-directors
TITLE: Durham Community School
TYPE: Finalsite-PDF
============================================================

DCS School Goals 2024- 2025 - Reflection
School: Durham Community School
Team Members: DCS Staff
District Goal: Focus on Student Achievement through Improved Student-Centered Teaching and Learning
DCS Goal #1 Strategies and Action Steps Responsibility Evidence of Effectiveness
Year 2 of 2: Align CharacterStrong practices Learning Culture team and R/C Template for staff to use to plan
Develop and implement a strategic with Responsive Classroom consultant out their R/C and C/S work
and sustainable system to provide practices. Completed
interventions for Social and
Plan school schedule to include Administration/ School Leadership The time for C/S work will be
Emotional Learning.
specific time for CharacterStrong Team embedded in each grade level’s
curriculum schedule. Completed
As a result of this work:
1. There will be a Multi Tiered
Train leaders for Tier 2 practices S/W and RTI-B facilitator Attendance at PD training
System of Support in place
Completed
for social and emotional
learning which will support
Plan and implement PD for all Administration/ Learning Culture Embedded in PD plans for the
students across the grade
staff to begin the school year. Team launch of the school year.
levels of DCS.
Completed
2. There will be a decrease of
Establish daily and weekly Administration/ Learning Culture Daily and weekly practices will be
10% in the number of
routines to support Tier 1 work. Team consistently evident across grade
individual students referred
levels. Including daily
for office disciplinary action
announcements and weekly
on the behavior reporting
messages for staff. Completed
form.
Plan and implement ongoing PD Administration/ Learning Culture Staff Meeting / PLD calendar
3. There will be anecdotal
for staff throughout the year for Team Completed
evidence of students using
both CharacterStrong and
strategies to support their own
Responsive Classroom.
and others' learning.
Launch universal screener for Tier Learning Culture Team Screener data Completed

2 work.
Establish an action team to Learning Culture Team Groups created and receiving
synthesize screening data with support based on objective criteria.
attendance, academic, and Completed
behavioral data to establish Tier 2
intervention plans.
Plan and implement Tier 3 PD as Special Education Team Completed
the materials come on line.
Review and reflect on year 1 School Leadership Team Plans for year 2 of
implementation and plan implementation. Completed
adjustments or ongoing PD as
needed.
Reflection on identified outcomes.
As a result of this work:
● There will be a Multi Tiered System of Support in place for social and emotional learning which will support students across the
grade levels of DCS.
○ This has been achieved. We now have a system in place that encompasses the core facets of an MTSS model (universal screening;
progress monitoring; a team monitoring the process; different tiers of support). With Responsive Classroom and CharacterStrong as
Tier 1 initiatives, we now have our Bridges program, CharacterStrong programming, Counselors, and Social Worker providing Tiers 2
and 3 levels of support. We have also worked with our Special Education team to ensure a continuum of support if a student has
functional goals on their IEP.
● There will be a decrease of 10% in the number of individual students referred for office disciplinary action on the behavior reporting
form.
○ This statistic was interesting to reflect upon. The number of individual referrals for office disciplinary action actually stayed flat. It
may have been wishful thinking to expect a drop off in the implementation year, as not only was it new for students, but also new for
staff, and so new habits had not yet been fully developed. What we did see though when reviewing end of year data, was that the
percentage of students flagged for lacking coping skills had halved from 22% to 11%. This was a positive outcome as it can indicate
that more students now have strengths for handling both internalized or externalized challenges.

● There will be anecdotal evidence of students using strategies to support their own and others' learning.
○ This was evident throughout the year. We were increasingly able to reference skills that students were learning for them to then reflect
upon or celebrate that they were using their skills and tools. A couple of examples are:
■ A 1st grader needed to meet with Kate to solve a problem. Having shared what happened he then said “My teacher has been
working with me on feelings, the strategy that I usually use is breathe in - breathe out (which he then modeled ) and it helps
me.” “This time I think I may have been too frustrated.” When he then went down to repair the situation with his classmate,
unprompted, he started by saying respectfully to the other child “When you do that, I get really frustrated” before going on to
apologize for how his frustration came out.
■ Students have approached different staff members to voice a concern about how a classmate or classmates may have treated
them. When prompted by “This sounds like a conflict. Have you thought about using the Tree of Choices to solve it?” (How
big a problem is it ? - How does it make you feel? - What action will you take? - Talk it out; Breathe it out; Move it out)
Invariably students then quickly identify a strategy and go off to solve the issue on their own.

DCS School Goals 2025- 2026
School: Durham Community School
Team Members: DCS Staff
District Goal: Focus on Student Achievement through Improved Student-Centered Teaching and Learning
DCS Goal #1 Strategies and Action Steps Responsibility Evidence of Effectiveness
Increase cognitive engagement of School Leadership Team develop Administrators Summer Institute focus.
students Prek-8. understanding of facets of Strategists
cognitive engagement and School Leadership Team.
strategies for increasing student
“Cognitively Engaged students are
cognitive engagement.
drivers in their own learning. They
invest mental effort, name and work
towards their own learning goals, Provide PD to all staff about Administrators Agenda items for PD time.
reflect on their learning, and apply progression of Cognitive Strategists
self regulation skills.” Engagement and the role of the School Leadership Team.
clear criteria, feedback,
As a result of this work: self-reflection and goal setting
1. A reflection tool will be
All teachers have a goal around Administrators Goals in e-portfolios
developed to identify
strengths and needs of cognitive engagement Teaching staff
students around cognitive
Revisit and teach into Habits of Teaching staff Student awareness of Habits of
engagement. This will also
Work Work.
provide baseline data and
impact data at the end of the More alignment between reported
year. levels on report cards and what is
2. Teachers will develop and experienced in the classroom.
utilize action steps to increase
student skills around Teachers develop and use tools for Teaching staff Artefacts that may include
determination and students to self reflect and goal set exemplars, rubrics, exit tickets,
engagement. relative to learning criteria portfolios etc.
3. Students will receive ongoing
feedback as they work Develop a progression for different School Leadership Team Progression document

towards their goals. grade spans that has
developmentally appropriate
indicators for what cognitive
engagement looks like
Teachers gather data of their Teaching staff Spread sheets and patterns
students to progress monitor using identified.
the Cognitive Engagement
progression tool
Utilize PD with Paul White Administrators Specific goal work feedback from
Strategists Paul
Teaching staff
Refine student-led conference Middle School Advisors & PD time, student goals and
practices to increase reflection and Teaching staff portfolios.
goal setting skills
DCS Goal #2 Strategies and Action Steps Responsibility Evidence of Effectiveness
Increase all students’ sense of Continue to implement Teaching staff & Advisors Daily and weekly practices will be
belonging in school to impact both CharacterStrong curriculum in all School counseling team consistently evident across grade
classrooms/advisories pk-8. Administration levels. Including daily
student well-being and attendance.
announcements and weekly
As a result of this work there will
messages for staff.
be a 10% reduction in chronic
absenteeism from 9.6% to 8.64%. Attend state/ Count Me In Administration Notes and resources from the
attendance conference to identify conference.
additional strategies to increase
attendance rates.
Regularly meet as an attendance School counseling team Attendance tracking document
team to track student absences. Administration kept accurately and up to date.

School Nurse
Collaborate across the district with Administration Shared district folder of effective
Attendance Coordinators from attendance resources
other schools to share resources
and strategies.
Hold attendance meetings with School counseling team Attendance support plans
families approaching the threshold Administration developed and followed.
for chronic absenteeism or truancy. School Nurse
Teaching Staff
Use positive reinforcement Administration Improvement in attendance data.
strategies such as: School counseling team
-send positive postcards for Teaching Staff
improving attendance rates of
students who meet the “chronically
absent” threshold
-Teachers reach out to families when
a student has three absences or a
change in attendance
-Promote events like “spirit week”
and partner class events
-Use Reach My Teach to send
informative messages about
attendance