SOURCE: https://www.rsu5.org/fs/resource-manager/view/08b80569-eaa6-43d9-b4f6-3bd7f258b4a0
SECTION: /board-of-directors-and-policies/board-of-directors
TITLE: Instructional Support
TYPE: Finalsite-PDF
============================================================

2021-2022 Reflection
School/Department: Instructional Support
District Goal:
Goal 1: RSU5 students experience a joyful learning climate that is safe, nurturing, and fosters curiosity.
Objective 1.1: Strengthen and align social/emotional systems in order to build student confidence and independence in the least restrictive environment. (K-12)
Goal Strategies & Action Steps Responsibility Timeline Evidence of Effectiveness
1. Consistent use of language to 1. Use PATHS curriculum in Director of Fall 2021-Spring 1a. Consistent use of PATHs curriculum in
support students based on grades K-5 to provide Instructional 2022 grades K-5.
social-emotional learning instruction in replacement Support, ● PATHs curriculum was
behaviors to students Instructional purchased based on the assessed
2. Implement positive behavior Strategists, and need to 1) provide specially
support plans (PBSP) consistently 2. Support students to Staff designed instruction to students
function and learn with disabilities in grades K-5,
independently 2) ensure a consistent,
systematic development
approach for enhancing social
and emotional competence in
learners with consistent use of
language (terminology) to
support emotional learning
● The goal for 2022 was to use
the PATHs curriculum
consistently in grades K-5.
● Evaluation of implementation
revealed that the PATHS
curriculum is in use at DCS &
PES. One (1) kit was purchased
for MSS. PATHS is not in use at
MLS
1b. Assess effectiveness of SEL instruction
at middle school level and make changes if
needed.
● DCS and FMS using Everyday

Speech
● DCS using Middle School Smarts
and Mind Up
1c. Continue 2nd year of providing courses
in SEL instruction at FHS.
● Course still being taught at FHS to
students in the Choices program.
2. Consistent use of positive behavior
support plans (PBSP):
● Positive Behavior Support Plan
(PBSP) template created
● BCBA consultants provide
professional learning and support
to school teams to assist with
FBAs and complex PBSPs and
build capacity among the school
team

2021-2022 Reflection
School/Department: Instructional Support
District Goal:
Goal 1: RSU5 students experience a joyful learning climate that is safe, nurturing, and fosters curiosity.
Objective 1.2: Ensure that student growth is measured and communicated in meaningful ways(K-12).
Goal Strategies and Action Responsibility Timeline Evidence of Effectiveness
Steps
1. Collect academic and 1. Formalize process Director of 1. Continue to use the data collection
functional data consistently of data collection Instructional template to monitor student progress in
and analysis to Support, reading.
2. Review data monthly to monitor student Instructional ● Use of Spire and OG; Teachers
monitor student progress progress in reading Strategists, and Staff College levels, Gestalt -Ellis
and math 3X per Test of Coding Skills, and
3. Review data each trimester year NWEA data used to progress
to determine instructional monitor and measure progress
effectiveness
2 & 3. Review data monthly and at each
4. Compile data each trimester to determine instructional
trimester to monitor student effectiveness
progress and growth ● Instructional Strategists &
Dir. of Instructional
5. Evaluate effectiveness of Support continue to meet
academic and functional with teachers bi-weekly in
instruction PLC meetings & every
trimester to review data
4 & 5. Data is compiled each
trimester to monitor student
progress and growth
● Special ed. Teachers use
DIBELS/Acadience Math
and Reading measures
● Special Ed. teachers use

specific assessments
aligned to
curriculum(CBA)
2. Provide math template and PD
to use the template
● Template was not rolled out as
it was found to be redundant
since there was a form already
in use “Student Data Review
Template”
3. Special educators will attend DOE
training on how to do math running
records
● Not implemented
4. Lisa Demick will provide consultation
to special ed staff on math content and
progression of skill acquisition
● In progress & ongoing
● 10/7/22 - Developing
Mathematical Reasoning in
Striving Learners
○ Teachers identified
hallmarks of the
developmental stages of
mathematical reasoning.
○ Teachers explored tools
and strategies to advance
students’ stages of
development
○ Numeracy & the
progression of
mathematical reasoning
○ Tools,activities, and
routines to build numeracy
○ Analysis of What Does
Math Support Look Like
in RSU 5? (Dot graph

activity)
○ Teachers engaged in grade
level unpacking in groups
to better understand
upcoming units.
○ Review of K-5 EM4 Unit
progression & analysis of
implications for students
with shared time between
settings.
○ Review current curriculum
materials and student
performance to determine
next steps
5. Determine appropriate
interventions/programs to teach math to
students with disabilities
● 11/10/22 - Addressing the
Specialized Language Challenges
in Mathematics
○ Teachers analyzed
curriculum materials and
upcoming lessons to
identify and troubleshoot
challenges for students
that struggle with
language and
mathematics.
6. Provide PD on using above resources to
identify IEP math goals based on essential
mastery expectations
● Math Professional Learning
sessions addressed:
○ Exploring the roadblocks
○ Three levels of vocabulary
○ Contextualizing
Mathematical Concepts

○ Expanding supports
○ Cracking open number
stories
○ Sense making before
solving-
○ Numberless word
problems
○ Sorting and classifying by
type
○ Storytelling/ student
generated number stories

2022-2023 Goals
School/Department: Instructional Support
District Goal:
Goal 1: RSU5 students experience a joyful learning climate that is safe, nurturing, and fosters curiosity.
Objective 1.1F: Evaluate the effectiveness of improved or new practices/structures and adjust as necessary.
Goal Strategies and Action Steps Responsibility Timeline Evidence of Effectiveness
1. Review/evaluate all 1a. Complete walk-throughs Director of Instructional 1. Fall/Winter 2022/23 1a. Program observation and
specialized programs (i.e., & observations of specialized Support, Instructional evaluations completed and
Functional Life Skills programs usingEssential Strategists, and Staff 2. Spring - Summer needs assessed
(Autism/InD), Choices, Elements Checklistto review ● Bright spots and
Bridges, etc.) elements of: strengths identified
- Classroom Culture & ● Opportunities
2. Review and evaluate the Environment identified
process for determining the - Instructional Delivery ● Next Steps
need for Adult Support, and - Content Area determined
all adult support assignments Literacy ○ Degrees of
using a rubric to ensure we - Multi-Tiered System support,
are meeting student needs and of Student Supports Professional
optimizing district resources (MTSS) Learning, etc.
1b. Convene workgroup to 1b.
i. review and update all i. & ii.Updated Choices
internal Choices Program Manual: Purpose,
Program (behavior) Philosophy, Instructional
documents (DCS, FMS, Model & Support Plan
FHS) to ensure that
philosophy & approach iii. Creation & launch of
is trauma-informed DistrictGuide for Responding
to Classroom Disruptive
ii. ensure continuity of Behavior
programming and
consistency of care 2. Creation & launch of
throughout programs DistrictSpecial Circumstance

Instructional Assistance
iii. develop district-wide (SCIA) Assessment Resource
expectations for adult Guide
interactions with
students in response to
student behavior that
are:
• trauma-sensitive and
trauma-informed
• function-sensitive and
function-informed
• honor student's right to
body autonomy
• honor the student’s
right to communicate
(vocal, sign, symbols or
technology) their refusal
or rejection of undesired
objects, actions, or
events
2. Develop process for
systematically
conducting aSpecial
Circumstance
Instructional Assistance
(SCIA)assessment for a
student with a disability

2022-2023 Goals
School/Department: Instructional Support
District Goal:
Goal 1: RSU5 students experience a joyful learning climate that is safe, nurturing, and fosters curiosity.
Objective 1.4: Objective 1.4: Strengthen diversity, equity and inclusion practices.
Goal Strategies and Action Steps Responsibility Timeline Evidence of Effectiveness
1. Ensure that all special 1. Disseminate and establish Director of Instructional Fall 2022 - Spring 2023 1a., 2a & 2b. Observations
education staff learn and theCommunication Bill of Support, Instructional using the Essential Elements
understand: Rightsas a social justice Strategists, and Staff observation tool indicated
● the expectation and imperative program improvements in:
conceptual model for ● Classroom Culture
providing Access, 2a. Disseminate Approved and Environment
Participation, and Models of Service Delivery to ● Instructional Delivery
Progress in the define Inclusive Models of ● Content Area
General Education Service Delivery and ensure Literacy
Curriculum for all that Restrictive placements ● Multi-Tiered System
Students with are based on data and of Student Supports
Disabilities evidence (MTSS)
● the K-12 Curricular
and Assessment 2b. Provide professional 2a. Program observation and
pathways for development and technical evaluations completed and
Students with assistance for administrators needs assessed:
Disabilities and teachers regarding the ● Bright spots and
● the concept of the continuum of Special strengths identified
least restrictive Education Service Delivery ● Opportunities
environment. identified
2c. Review and analyze Least ● Next Steps
Restrictive Environment determined
(LRE) data ● Degrees of support,
Professional
2d. Convene workgroup to Learning, etc.
review and analyze the
quality of programming in

RSU5functional life skills 2c. LRE data indicates that
(FLS) classrooms using the majority of students with
resources created by the disabilities are education in
National Center and State inclusive settings
Collaborative (NCSC)
2d. Creation & launch of
i. Rebrand FLS program as LiFT Program Purpose,
LiFT (Learning, Independent Philosophy, Instructional
Functioning & Transition) to Model & Support Plan
ensure that this program is
identified in a way that is
respectful and ensures that
students with complex
learning, behavioral,
cognitive and/or
neurodevelopmental profiles,
including significant
cognitive disabilities, learn
the academic, independent
functioning, communication,
and social emotional skills to
graduate from high school
ready for post-secondary
transition, including college,
career, community and full
participation in civic life.
ii. Develop Program Purpose,
Philosophy, Instructional
Model & Support Plan to
include:
● Instructional Model:
Standards-Based and
Person-Centered
Instruction
● Curricular Pathways
for Students in the
LIFT Program
● Support for Teaching

& Learning in LIFT
Classrooms
● Multi-Disciplinary
Assessment
iii. Review disability labels
for all students served in FLS
classrooms to ensure that
placement is the LRE and
curricular pathway is
appropriate and students have
appropriate level of access to
general ed. curriculum.

Communication Bill of Rights
National Joint Committee for the
Communication Needs of Persons
With Severe Disabilities (NJC)
All students – including students with a disability of any extent or severity – have a basic right to
affect, through communication, the conditions of their existence.
In accordance with the National Joint Committee for the Communication Needs of Persons with
Severe Disabilities (NJC), beyond this basic right, a number of specific communication rights
should be ensured in all daily interactions and interventions involving
students who have severe and profound disabilities.
To participate fully in communication interactions,
each student has these fundamental communication rights:
- The right to interact socially, maintain social closeness, and build relationships.
- The right to request desired objects, actions, events, and people even when the
desired outcome cannot be realized.
- The right to have communication acts acknowledged and responded to even when the
desired outcome cannot be realized.
- The right to have clear, meaningful, and culturally and linguistically appropriate
communications.
- The right to refuse or reject undesired objects, actions, or events.
- The right to express personal preferences and feelings.
- The right to make choices from meaningful alternatives.
- The right to make comments and share opinions.
- The right to ask for and give information, including information about changes in routine
and environment.
- The right to be informed about people and events in one’s life.
- The right to access interventions and supports that improve communication.
- The right to have access to functioning augmentative and alternative
communication(AAC) and other assistive technology (AT) services and devices at all
times.
- The right to access environmental contexts, interactions, and opportunities that promote
their participation as full communication partners with other people, including peers.
- The right to be treated with dignity and addressed with respect and courtesy.
- The right to be addressed directly and not be spoken for or talked about in the third
person while present.
Source:
National Joint Committee for the Communication Needs of Persons With Severe Disabilities (NJC), 2016
Communication Bill of Rights:http://www.asha.org/uploadedFiles/NJC-Communication-Bill-Rights.pdf
Brady, N. C., Bruce, S., Goldman, A., Erickson, K., Mineo, B., Ogletree, B. T., Paul, D., Romski, M.,
Sevcik, R., Siegel, E., Schoonover, J., Snell, M., Sylvester, L., & Wilkinson, K. (2016). Communication
services and supports for individuals with severe disabilities: Guidance for assessment and intervention.
American Journal on Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities, 121(2), 121-138.

Communication Bill of Rights
National Joint Committee for the
Communication Needs of Persons
With Severe Disabilities (NJC)
All students – including students with a disability of any extent or severity – have a basic right to
affect, through communication, the conditions of their existence.
In accordance with the National Joint Committee for the Communication Needs of Persons with
Severe Disabilities (NJC), beyond this basic right, a number of specific communication rights
should be ensured in all daily interactions and interventions involving
students who have severe and profound disabilities.
To participate fully in communication interactions,
each student has these fundamental communication rights:
- The right to interact socially, maintain social closeness, and build relationships.
- The right to request desired objects, actions, events, and people even when the
desired outcome cannot be realized.
- The right to have communication acts acknowledged and responded to even when the
desired outcome cannot be realized.
- The right to have clear, meaningful, and culturally and linguistically appropriate
communications.
- The right to refuse or reject undesired objects, actions, or events.
- The right to express personal preferences and feelings.
- The right to make choices from meaningful alternatives.
- The right to make comments and share opinions.
- The right to ask for and give information, including information about changes in routine
and environment.
- The right to be informed about people and events in one’s life.
- The right to access interventions and supports that improve communication.
- The right to have access to functioning augmentative and alternative
communication(AAC) and other assistive technology (AT) services and devices at all
times.
- The right to access environmental contexts, interactions, and opportunities that promote
their participation as full communication partners with other people, including peers.
- The right to be treated with dignity and addressed with respect and courtesy.
- The right to be addressed directly and not be spoken for or talked about in the third
person while present.
Source:
National Joint Committee for the Communication Needs of Persons With Severe Disabilities (NJC), 2016
Communication Bill of Rights:http://www.asha.org/uploadedFiles/NJC-Communication-Bill-Rights.pdf
Brady, N. C., Bruce, S., Goldman, A., Erickson, K., Mineo, B., Ogletree, B. T., Paul, D., Romski, M.,
Sevcik, R., Siegel, E., Schoonover, J., Snell, M., Sylvester, L., & Wilkinson, K. (2016). Communication
services and supports for individuals with severe disabilities: Guidance for assessment and intervention.
American Journal on Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities, 121(2), 121-138.