SOURCE: https://www.rsu5.org/fs/resource-manager/view/e592b787-cfe6-41e5-b2c9-8344921f1ccd
SECTION: /board-of-directors-and-policies/board-of-directors
TITLE: 2019-2020 Board of Directors Goals
TYPE: Finalsite-PDF
============================================================

RSU5 Goals
2019-2020
RSU5’s mission is to inspire and support every learner by
challenging minds, building character, sparking creativity, and
nurturing passions.
Approved by Board: 9-25-19
1

Mission: To inspire and support every learner by challenging minds, building character,
sparking creativity, and nurturing passions.
Goal 1: All RSU5 students experience a joyful learning climate that is safe, nurturing, and fosters curiosity.
Evidence:
● Improvement on assessments collected on District Scorecard
Strategic Action Strategies: Person Progress Indicators
Objective 1.1: Responsible
Strengthen and align all A. Identify current Assistant Supt. A/B: Written
social/emotional development existing practices and documentation of existing
systems. structures at all grade Lead Guidance practices/structures,
levels to assess their Counselor strengths and
effectiveness weaknesses, and gaps in
B. Identify gaps and or 1 Building practice
needed Administrator
improvements in C. Written report on
practices/structures options considered for
C. Explore options for changing, adding or
filling gaps and improving
making improvements practices/structures
D. Develop and
recommend a plan to D. Written
fill gaps and make recommendations to
improvements Superintendent
2

Mission: To inspire and support every learner by challenging minds, building character, sparking
creativity, and nurturing passions.
Goal 2: All RSU5 students regularly engage in meaningful student centered learning
Evidence:
● Improvement on assessments collected on District Scorecard
Strategic Action Strategies: Person Responsible Progress
Objective 2.1: Indicators
Review research A. Establish a shared Assistant Superintendent A. Agreed upon
and explore understanding/definition of and published
options for the characteristics of student 1 Building Administrator characteristics of
implementation centered learning “RSU5 student
of student Teachers centered learning”
centered B. Assess current RSU5
instructional instructional practices to B. Written summary
practices. determine alignment with student documentation of
centered learning characteristics alignment of
and identify gaps existing student
centered practices
3

Mission: To inspire and support every learner by challenging minds, building character,
sparking creativity, and nurturing passions.
Goal 2: All RSU5 students regularly engage in meaningful student centered learning.
Evidence:
● Improvement on assessments collected on District Scorecard
Strategic Action Strategies: Person Responsible Progress Indicators
Objective 2.3:
Provide strong A. Identify opportunities for Superintendent A.Written report on options
support for expanding staff considered for changing,
professional collaboration time Teachers adding/improving practices
practices that B. Develop and recommend
foster a plan to foster Association President B.Documentation of
collaboration collaboration and staff meetings with Association/
and staff voice, voice Principals decisions made
and strengthen C. Implement
instruction to recommendations
meet the needs
of all learners.
4

Mission: To inspire and support every learner by challenging minds, building character,
sparking creativity, and nurturing passions.
Goal 2.5: All RSU5 students regularly engage in meaningful student centered learning.
Evidence:
● Improvement on assessments collected on District Scorecard
Strategic Action Strategies: Person Responsible Progress Indicators
Objective 2.5:
A. Create a protocol for
Superintendent Written protocol
Establish
establishing student
formalized
achievement goals
Assistant Superintendent
systems for
based on agreed upon
annual
data points.
Data Specialist
identification of
goals for the
improvement of
student
achievement
5

Mission: To inspire and support every learner by challenging minds, building character,
sparking creativity, and nurturing passions.
Goal 3: All RSU5 school-parent-community partnerships are based on strong communication and
active involvement to support student success.
Evidence:
● Improvement on assessments collected on District Scorecard
Strategic Action Strategies: Person Responsible Progress Indicators
Objective 3.1:
A. Identify and assess the
Strategic Communications A/B Written documentation
Expand
effectiveness of all
Committee of existing communication
avenues used
existing modes of
modes with their strengths
to proactively
communication with
Superintendent and weaknesses
distribute
parents and community
information
about RSU5
B. Identify needed
schools and
improvements
seek feedback
C. Written report on options
from
C. Explore options for
for changing, adding
stakeholders
revising adjusting,
communication strategies
about the
expanding
schools.
communication
strategies
6

Mission: To inspire and support every learner by challenging minds, building character,
sparking creativity, and nurturing passions.
Goal 3: All RSU5 school-parent-community partnerships are based on strong communication and
active involvement to support student success.
Evidence:
● Improvement on assessments collected on District Scorecard
Strategic Action Strategies: Person Responsible Progress Indicators
Objective 3.2:
A. Identify and assess the
Assistant Superintendent A.Written documentation of
Engage all
effectiveness of current
existing CBL partnerships
RSU5 learners
existing
Building Principals
in community
school-community
based learning
learning partnerships.
Outreach and Service
both in the
Learning Coordinator
classroom and
out in the
community.
7

Mission: To inspire and support every learner by challenging minds, building character,
sparking creativity, and nurturing passions.
Goal 4: RSU5 has well developed and refined finance, facilities, transportation and food service
systems to support the learning of all students..
Evidence:
● Improvement on assessments collected on District Scorecard
Strategic Action Strategies: Person Responsible Progress Indicators
Objective 4.1:
A. Review and update the
Superintendent A. Written documentation of
Ensure that all
existing Capital
existing Capital
staff and
Improvement Plan (CIP)
Director of Transportation Improvement Plan along
students have
and Facilities with the review and
quality facilities
prioritization of adjustments
to meet their
Director of Finance and additional facility needs
needs.
8

Mission: To inspire and support every learner by challenging minds, building character,
sparking creativity, and nurturing passions.
Goal 4: RSU5 has well developed and refined finance, facilities, transportation and food service
systems to support the learning of all students.
Evidence:
● Improvement on assessments collected on District Scorecard
Strategic Action Strategies: Person Responsible Progress Indicators
Objective 4.2:
A. Review and assess the
Assistant Superintendent A.Written documentation of
Attract and
effectiveness of existing
assessment of existing
retain highly
practices and policies to
practices/policies
effective staff
attract and retain quality
Director of Human
staff (include induction
Resources
and mentoring practices)
B. Identify gaps and/or
needed improvements in
practices/policies
C. Review and improve
protocols for required
trainings
9

Mission: To inspire and support every learner by challenging minds, building character,
sparking creativity, and nurturing passions.
Goal 4: RSU5 has well developed and refined finance, facilities, transportation and food service
systems to support the learning of all students.
Evidence:
● Improvement on assessments collected on District Scorecard
Strategic Action Strategies: Person Responsible Progress Indicators
Objective 4.4:
A. Assess existing bus runs
Director of Facilities and A/B.Written documentation
Provide all
Transportation of assessment of the
students
B. Explore options to
adequacy of existing bus
transportation
provide transportation for
Athletic Director runs and options
that supports
all curricular and
considered for changing,
their
extracurricular programs
One Principal adding or improving bus
participation in
services
curricular and
C. Make recommendations
extra-curricular
to improve services for
C.Written recommendations
programs
students
to Superintendent
10

11