SOURCE: https://www.rsu5.org/fs/resource-manager/view/9881d98f-d482-4746-a009-5706a2990747
SECTION: /board-of-directors-and-policies/board-committees/advisory-committees/fhs-building-advisory-committee-archive
TITLE: October 5, 2016 Minutes
TYPE: Finalsite-PDF
============================================================

Meeting Notes
Freeport High School
Project:
October 5, 2016 at 7:30 a.m.
Date:
Attendees: Lyndon Keck*, John Simoneau/Committee Chairman, Kelly Wentworth, Business Manager/RSU 5,
Ben Jamo, David Watts/RSU 8, Catherine Breer, Dr. Becky Foley, Superintendent/RSU 5, Charlie
Mellon, Assistant Principal/Freeport High School, David Smail/FHS Physics, Kim LaMarre, David
Steckler, Dennis Ouellete, Facilities Director/RSU 5, Tim Giddings and Michelle Ritcheson.
Purpose: Monthly Building Committee Meeting
These notes were prepared by Lyndon Keck to the best of his ability. If there are any oversights
please notify PDT Architects within three (3) working days.
Topic Agenda/Notes Action
1. The meeting was called to order at 7:35 a.m.
2. Lyndon gave an update/overview of building progress and schedule.
3. The architect and construction team approved Sheridan’s Application for
Payment #11 in the amount of $550,806. This represents 76.8% completion
of the project to date.
4. Change Order Summary #12 dated September 23, 2016 was approved in
the amount of $20,729. It contained seven (7) items which included items
previously discussed and approved by the Building Committee those
included new ceiling and lights at the library office and commons, as well as
new carpet tile in the same area. Also included cracked CMU in Women’s
and Men’s Bathroom 100 which had been previously discussed and
approved.
New proposals approved by the construction team included roof membrane
changes which included tapered insulation and scuppers to be installed at
the “knuckle” between the 1960 building, gymnasium, performing arts center
and the new addition. Other new work included electrical work and added
phone and data lines, as well as infilling an exterior wall vent in Learning
Commons #311.
5. Lyndon passed out a copy of Sheridan’s monthly report, as well as the
monthly summary by Brook Plummer, Clerk of the Works.
6. Lyndon summarized the status of the work saying that a lot of exterior work
had been done over the last month, including base paving, sidewalk gravel
49 DARTMOUTH STREET PORTLAND , MAINE 0 4 1 0 1 2 0 7 – 7 7 5 – 1 0 5 9 WWW . PDTARCHS . COM
Page 1 of 5

Meeting Notes
Topic Agenda/Notes Action
sub-base, concrete curbs, spreading of loam and seeding, and final grading
at swales, retention basins as well as general clean up on the site.
7. Lyndon explained that most of the drywall was completed. The ceiling grid
had been installed but the ceiling had not been flooded with ceiling tiles.
Above ceiling inspections will occur the week of October 10th with ceilings
starting to be installed the following week, October 17th.
8. Trico was starting to install millwork and casework and putting benches in
the hallways.
9. A great deal of work had been accomplished on the flooring. Tile floors had
been installed in bathrooms. Tile walls had been installed at the
cafeteria/food court and serving kitchen.
10. Moisture tests for the second floor slab was complete and acceptable
allowing Paul White Flooring to install the remaining vinyl and carpet in the
second floor classrooms.
11. Caprara kitchen equipment will be installed at the end of October and early
November. The cooler/freezer has been installed.
12. Contractor informed the architect and the construction team they were going
to finish the addition early. If the owner wanted it turned over before
Thanksgiving it was a real possibility. The construction team and school
administration will consider whether there are any advantages to taking the
school early. Lyndon explained traditionally schools accept buildings for
occupancy either in the summer or over the holiday break at the end of
December. Generally schools need about 10-12 days to install furnishings
and move teacher’s equipment.
13. There was a question and request that perhaps the music room could be
turned over early and occupied by the school.
14. It was also explained the contractor had asked if they could begin foundation
work for the new front door entrance with ramps and canopy this fall before
the start of winter. It was explained that the construction team and architect
thought this was unlikely because of security reasons. The contractor
suggested letting students and visitors enter the school at the end of the
science wing and back by the new bus drop-off.
49 DARTMOUTH STREET PORTLAND , MAINE 0 4 1 0 1 2 0 7 – 7 7 5 – 1 0 5 9 WWW . PDTARCHS . COM
Page 2 of 5

Meeting Notes
Topic Agenda/Notes Action
15. A question was asked about carbon monoxide fumes and an alarm which
had been set off in the school. It was explained by Superintendent Foley
that new protocol had been developed for Sheridan’s construction
superintendent related to any so-called “hot work” which would involve
welding or combustible devices. This will, hopefully, prevent future carbon
monoxide alarms or fire alarms from accidently being set off by construction
work.
16. There was discussion about whether the contractor could be allowed to
accelerate some other portions of work inside the building. The discussion
included Sheridan’s request that more work be shifted to the winter and
spring to avoid a rushed and chaotic summer renovation schedule.
Sheridan had acknowledged that they had taken on too much work which
resulted in difficult phasing and dusty work conditions.
17. There was a question if the architects had received a revised price for the
bathrooms back by the library and new proposed STEM area. Lyndon
responded that he had not seen the price and would request and forward the
price to John Simoneau as soon as it was received.
18. Lyndon explained that Sheridan Corporation had requested release of
retainage. At present the owner is holding $407,820 of retainage money.
Lyndon explained the purpose for retainage and explained the owner could
withhold all of the retainage until the end of the project, although it was more
common to release retainage about half way through the project if the owner
was satisfied with the quality of the work.
19. Sheridan had requested release of one half of the retainage or $203,500.
20. The Committee agreed to let PDT work with the construction team to
determine which line items would be acceptable for having partial or full
retainage released. It was agreed the Committee would not release a
general percentage on all line items but would look at each line item request
individually.
21. There was a discussion of open ended change proposals which had not
been approved or rejected. It was explained that PDT reviews all change
orders. There were some change orders requested which PDT had rejected
as unacceptable. Those items would fall into a category of doing the work
“under protest” where the contractor could resort to Article 42 for arbitration
and mediation under dispute resolution.
49 DARTMOUTH STREET PORTLAND , MAINE 0 4 1 0 1 2 0 7 – 7 7 5 – 1 0 5 9 WWW . PDTARCHS . COM
Page 3 of 5

Meeting Notes
Topic Agenda/Notes Action
22. Lyndon explained that Dennis had received several bills related to cleaning
inside the school. Sheridan had offered to provide a credit for final cleaning
services to defray the RSU’s cleaning costs. Dennis said he had come to an
agreement with Sheridan and was satisfied with it.
23. There was a discussion of mirrors in the Fitness Room. PDT explained the
specification called for tempered mirrors. The contractor had submitted an
annealed plate glass mirror which was unacceptable to the architect. There
is an on-going discussion between Sheridan as to what kind of mirror should
be installed and what the proper credit or value should be for the installed
mirrors.
24. Lyndon explained there was an outstanding change proposal to modify the
landscaping with reinforced turf at the back by the cafeteria. This change
order amount was over $12,000 ($13,808). Lyndon also explained that
yesterday loam had already been spread in the area and, in his opinion, it
was too late to implement this. The Committee agreed they would not
modify the landscaping plan at the back of the cafeteria at this time,
therefore, rejecting Change Proposal #096R.
25. It was agreed that the Committee could consider additional seating and
benches at the back without affecting the landscaping and grass at a future
time.
26. There was a brief discussion of a request by the Earth Club to consider
electric dyers instead of paper towels in the bathrooms. Lyndon explained
the drawings showed paper towels at the request of the owner. This is a
system the owner uses throughout all of its schools. There are no electric
hand dryers in other bathrooms on the project.
27. Lyndon explained he had not brought the copies of the spreadsheet that
showed improvements the Committee was intending to make in the future.
28. A Committee member noted there were four items the Building Committee
had chosen to wait on until the winter or spring.
29. John Simoneau explained those items would probably need to be acted on
no later than December because of a pending referendum for the three
communities related to the expenditure of monies for track and turf field.
30. John Simoneau gave an update on the track and turf field. He explained a
presentation had been made to the RSU 5 Board. The RSU 5 Board was
considering a referendum in January 2017 to ask the voters to reallocate
bond money and possibly contingency money, as well as the $600,000
49 DARTMOUTH STREET PORTLAND , MAINE 0 4 1 0 1 2 0 7 – 7 7 5 – 1 0 5 9 WWW . PDTARCHS . COM
Page 4 of 5

Meeting Notes
Topic Agenda/Notes Action
which was intended to be used to upgrade the grass fields at the soccer
competition field.
31. There was discussion among the Committee of reviewing items to be
considered for upgrades. One Committee member requested upgrades to
exterior shelving in the classrooms. Another Committee member
recommended upgrading teacher storage cabinets or wardrobes.
32. There was a suggestion to upgrade current window coverings to match what
will be installed in the new building.
33. PDT was asked to review the specification for the kinds of window coverings
to be installed in the new classrooms and provide a price to install similar
window shades at the existing classrooms.
34. The Committee reviewed the August 30, 2016 meeting notes. Lyndon was
asked to add an attendee, RSU 5 Board member Michelle Ritcheson. With
that change the minutes were approved as noted.
35. The Committee reviewed the meeting notes for June 1, 2016. It was
requested to add the name of David Smail as an attendee. With that change
the Committee then approved the minutes for June 1, 2016.
36. It was agreed at the next Building Committee meeting that the Building
Committee will tour the new addition. The Committee will meet at the
outdoor concrete plaza behind the new cafeteria at 7:30 a.m.
37. The next meeting will be Wednesday, November 2, 2016 at 7:30 a.m. at the
outdoor plaza behind the cafeteria.
END OF MEETING NOTES
49 DARTMOUTH STREET PORTLAND , MAINE 0 4 1 0 1 2 0 7 – 7 7 5 – 1 0 5 9 WWW . PDTARCHS . COM
Page 5 of 5