SOURCE: https://www.rsu5.org/fs/resource-manager/view/11e358b3-556f-42cf-af62-adc900ce5a2f
SECTION: /board-of-directors-and-policies/board-committees/advisory-committees/fhs-building-advisory-committee-archive
TITLE: May 4, 2016 Minutes
TYPE: Finalsite-PDF
============================================================

Meeting Notes
Freeport High School
Project:
May 4, 2016
Date:
Attendees: Lyndon Keck*, Kim LaMarre/Committee Member, John Simoneau/Committee Chairman,
Dennis Ouelette, Owner’s Representative/RSU 5, Kelly Wentworth, Business Manager/RSU 5,
Brian Campbell/FHS Principal, Ben Jamo, Kevin Nadeau, Seth Thompson, David Watts, Julie
Coleman, Tim Giddings, Ed McDonough, Superintendent/RSU 5 and Suzanne Morin/PDT Architects
Purpose: Building Committee Meeting
These notes were prepared by Lyndon Keck to the best of his ability. If there are any oversights
please notify PDT Architects within three (3) working days.
Topic Agenda/Notes Action
1. The meeting was called to order by John Simoneau at 7:35 a.m.
2. John gave a recap for the Committee of the previous day’s pay requisition
and construction meeting. He explained that the construction team had
approved Pay Requisition #6 in the amount of $469,696. The project is 26%
complete. He also explained Change Order #5, which had five individual
change order items on it, was signed and approved. The total of the five
change order items was $30,066 and included adding the “bright silver” color
to the Marvin windows, providing electrical power and data to the relocated
temporary classroom ($9,436), adding welded wire mesh to hold the radiant
tubing on the first floor ($8,405), constructing a new block pier adjacent to
the Freeport Performing Arts Center ($608), and replacing twelve (12) roof
drains on the existing 1961 roof ($3582).
3. John also explained that Change Order #6 had been approved. It had two
individual change order items on it. The first was changes which needed to
be made to relocate the FPAC HVAC duct ($15,266) and the second change
order item was to insulate the FPAC ductwork where it was discovered it
was not previously insulated ($3,694). Total change order price was
$18,960.
4. John explained that substantial work had happened over the previous month
including the completion of the structural steel bar joists for the floor and
roof, exterior steel stud cold metal framing with dense glass sheathing and
the application of the blue air barrier sheet membrane. John explained that
re-roofing was happening now on the 1961 building. Over April vacation the
waterline had been installed on Holbrook Street with the addition of a new
fire hydrant and new water service into the addition.
49 DARTMOUTH STREET PORTLAND , MAINE 0 4 1 0 1 2 0 7 – 7 7 5 – 1 0 5 9 WWW . PDTARCHS . COM
Page 1 of 6

Meeting Notes
Topic Agenda/Notes Action
5. Lyndon explained that during the course of installing the waterline over April
vacation the contractor had found unsuitable soils on Holbrook Street
containing muck and tree stumps which needed to be removed. This will be
included in a future change order. Lyndon also explained that trench ledge
needed to be removed to install the waterline and will also be part of a future
change order.
6. Lyndon commented that the second floor classroom concrete slab had been
poured the previous month. After the pay requisition meeting PDT had met
with the mason who was starting the brick veneer masonry at the back of the
gym storage areas. Lyndon also explained PDT had selected a tinted color
mortar that more closely resembles the brick color rather than the cheaper
gray white mortar.
7. Lyndon noted the contractor had passed out a revised schedule that showed
overall they were between one and three weeks ahead of schedule on major
milestones of the project.
8. PDT passed out a number of handouts for Committee members. These
included floor plans prepared by Suzanne showing new, existing and reused
furniture for all of the classrooms in the existing building, except for the
science wing; drawings were passed out for the four bathroom conversion
plans at the library, a copy of the agenda, a copy of the April Building
Committee meeting notes, a copy of Brook Plummer’s monthly summary,
and a copy of a matrix developed by PDT for requested building upgrades.
9. The Committee worked its’ way through all of the line items for building
upgrades.
 The first line item was placing the ceiling and lighting in the library.
This item did not have a firm quote from Sheridan Corporation.
Lyndon stated he thought the budget allowance of $98,575 was
probably higher than what the final cost would be. Lyndon estimated
he thought the final cost would be closer to $75,000-$80,000.
 The next line item was replace the flooring in the library with carpet.
A firm price was obtained for this. The Committee chose to take no
action on this item.
 The next item was to gut and renovate the student bathrooms
across from the library. PDT was handed an unfinished quote from
Sheridan Corporation yesterday; it looks like the cost will be in the
vicinity of $100,000. This work can probably be done in the summer
of 2017. PDT needs time to vet the prices quoted by the
subcontractors and see if there are any cost saving measures that
might make sense in the design. The Committee took no action on
this item.
49 DARTMOUTH STREET PORTLAND , MAINE 0 4 1 0 1 2 0 7 – 7 7 5 – 1 0 5 9 WWW . PDTARCHS . COM
Page 2 of 6

Meeting Notes
Topic Agenda/Notes Action
 Next was new library furniture. This item has already been included
in the base furniture bid contract which was previously approved.
No action is require.
 Cost for Ethernet cable is included in later items. No action is
required.
 With regard to the classroom IT equipment request, Lyndon
explained in the original master budget ($94,572) had its own line
item for the purchase of devices related to technology. This $94,572
would not come out of construction contingency but out of a
separate line items. Seth, the technology director, attended the
meeting and spoke to his outline and expectations for expenditure of
the money. He explained the costs were actually $28,000 less than
what PDT had shown on the matrix. The expected additional cost
over and above $94,572 is $35,246.
10. Seth explained the cost of technology would be applied equally across new,
as well as existing classrooms in the 100 and 200 wing of the existing high
school. The devices which have been selected are short throw projectors
everywhere in teaching stations. Seth was expecting to purchase the
equipment this summer. It was clarified the vendor would be responsible for
installing the equipment. John expressed concern the vendor’s equipment
install would be compatible with what was left by the electrical subcontractor.
11. The Committee also talked about the electrical IT infrastructure for requested
classroom equipment. This work would be done by Regional Electric, the
electrical subcontractor to Sheridan, who would run conduit and pull wire for
both power and Cat VI cabling.
12. The Committee voted unanimously to approve line Item 10 in the amount of
$25,591 for electrical IT infrastructure to be put in now so future devices can
be installed at any time in the future.
13. The Committee voted unanimously to recommend to the RSU 5 Board of
Directors that an additional $36,246 be allocated out of the contingency for
additional IT equipment devices for the existing classrooms.
14. No quotes were available for exterior seating and tables behind the food
court so there was no discussion on this item.
15. Art installation had been previously approved. John noted the expenditures
to date had been very low. The Art Committee is getting a lot of donated
labor and materials.
49 DARTMOUTH STREET PORTLAND , MAINE 0 4 1 0 1 2 0 7 – 7 7 5 – 1 0 5 9 WWW . PDTARCHS . COM
Page 3 of 6

Meeting Notes
Topic Agenda/Notes Action
16. Regarding landscaping and seating in front of the school, there was no fixed
quotation for these items so there was no discussion by the Committee.
17. There were two types of kitchen upgrades requested. Each approximately
$5,800. The first was Item #14 for stacked washer/dryer with utilities. This
item was requested by the new Food Service Director while the project was
out to bid. The cost is for installation of utility, power, plumbing, and drains.
Questions were asked by the Committee as to whether or not other
washer/dryers could be used within the school. The only other washer/dryer
combo is in the locker room area. PDT stated that Health Departments
generally frown upon kitchen food service laundry being done in equipment
used by locker rooms. Questions were asked about how washing is being
handled now. Brian thought it was either being done in the locker room or
the staff was taking things home and doing it in their own personal
machines.
18. The Food Service Director had also requested other additional upgrades
such as an additional handwashing sink which the construction team had
vetoed.
19. There was also a request to change the point of sale cash wrap station and
a request for another table change in the kitchen. This estimate is
approximately $5,800.
20. Committee members unanimously approved Item #14 for expenses related
to the washer/dryer.
21. The Committee unanimously approved additional purchases for changes
and upgrades the cash wrap point of sale counters.
22. A Committee member asked about a school sign and if a digital display
would make sense located under or adjacent to the existing school sign in
front of the school. The Committee member suggested the cost could be in
the vicinity of $8,000-$10,000 but power would need to be run out to the
sign. It was suggested the controls for the sign could be wireless.
23. There was substantial discussion with regard to Items #16, #17 and #19
related to proximity readers for exterior doors, security alarms for exterior
doors around the building, additional hardware to support excess control
system, and security cameras, devices and wiring. John expressed concern
that there were still exclusions in the quotations and there wasn’t clarity
about who owned all of the pathways to the doors which needed to be
coordinated with masonry.
49 DARTMOUTH STREET PORTLAND , MAINE 0 4 1 0 1 2 0 7 – 7 7 5 – 1 0 5 9 WWW . PDTARCHS . COM
Page 4 of 6

Meeting Notes
Topic Agenda/Notes Action
24. Committee members agreed that having the maximum amount of security at
the high school was an important part of the project. The Committee should
carefully review the systems.
25. Lyndon explained that PDT had carried $75,000 in the original construction
budget for security cameras, proximity readers, and door contracts. This
money is intended for the new addition and only for those areas receiving
major renovation, such as the new front entrance, administration, guidance,
STEM classrooms, art rooms and one special education room. No money
was budgeted for the existing building for security systems.
26. There was considerable discussion about Item #19 acknowledging that
pathways need to be put in now but the Committee didn’t feel comfortable
approving or recommending $62,100 for the keyless entries, access control
and security alarms for exterior doors.
27. After additional discussion it was recommended that Item #17, adding
electrified hardware from HCI to support the access control system in the
amount of $20,675 be approved now so the hardware submittal could be
returned to the supplier and the appropriate hardware ordered. The vote
was unanimous.
28. It was also agreed by the Committee that PDT should work with the general
contractor to implement necessary pathways through masonry construction
for new doors as part of Item #19. The Committee did not, however,
approve all of Item #19 for recommendation to the RSU 5 Board.
29. Suzanne Morin asked if any additional furniture expenditures would be
considered at this time. She explained there were items being requested by
Principal Brian Campbell to be spent out of the unspent $40,000 as a result
of the low furniture bid. There was no vote or consensus on this item.
Suzanne also asked if the Committee wanted to consider any part of the
additional $164,600 for additional furnishings at this time. The Committee
said no they want to revisit furniture in the spring of 2017 after the project
had completed most of its interior renovations in the 1961 building.
30. PDT was requested to wrap up all miscellaneous expenses related to the
electrical hardware, access control systems, security cameras, devices and
pathways at least one week before the June meeting so the Committee
would have all numbers in front of them.
31. The Committee also requested the outdoor furnishing quotes be provided at
the next meeting and the cost for the display banner sign and electrical
digital sign be submitted for June as well.
32. Kelly Wentworth presented a summary of the total budget status which
included a three page handout. She explained the project started with two
contingencies. The first is Item 2.5 in the amount of $1,147,739. The
49 DARTMOUTH STREET PORTLAND , MAINE 0 4 1 0 1 2 0 7 – 7 7 5 – 1 0 5 9 WWW . PDTARCHS . COM
Page 5 of 6

Meeting Notes
Topic Agenda/Notes Action
second is the unspent expenditure resulting from the low bids from Sheridan
Corporation.
33. Kelly’s summary clarified there were additional monies that needed to come
out of the unspent Sheridan money which included asbestos expenditures,
portable classroom expenditures, as well as the $75,000 Lyndon had talked
about that was reserved for hardware, cameras, and access control system.
The actual amount of monies available as a result of the unspent low bid
was lower than the $680,000 previously mentioned.
34. There was discussion on the Committee’s part expressing concern that the
so called requested building upgrades were actually a blend which included
items that were not upgrades but had been deletions made in January 2015
as a result of inflation increases due to the lost year before construction.
The $75,000 for hardware is not an upgrade but money reserved for
security. The IT equipment expenditures also have a separate line item for
$94,572. There was an acknowledgement that more traditional change order
items such as unsuitable soils, ledge removal and other discovered items
and omissions were being taken out of the construction contingency line 2.5
under administration costs and reserves.
35. For the next meeting PDT will bring enlarged drawings showing the extent of
cameras, door contacts, and proximity readers for the entire security
package so the Committee has a clear understanding of requested
expenditures.
36. The Committee agreed to let Suzanne work with Brian to make small scale
expenditures out of the $40,000 unspent money as a result of the furnishing
low bid.
37. The next meeting date will be Wednesday, June 1, 2016 at 7:30 a.m. at the
Freeport High School Library. At the end of next month’s meeting
Committee members will go on a tour of the new addition. Hardhats will be
provided. Committee members are to wear boots or closed shoes, no open
toe sandals or high heels.
38. The meeting was adjourned at approximately 9:30 a.m.
END OF MEETING NOTES
49 DARTMOUTH STREET PORTLAND , MAINE 0 4 1 0 1 2 0 7 – 7 7 5 – 1 0 5 9 WWW . PDTARCHS . COM
Page 6 of 6