SOURCE: https://www.rsu5.org/fs/resource-manager/view/d55aae20-3fa2-4a39-bed9-c96da919749e
SECTION: /board-of-directors-and-policies/board-committees/advisory-committees/fhs-building-advisory-committee-archive
TITLE: February 3, 2016 Minutes
TYPE: Finalsite-PDF
============================================================

Meeting Notes
Freeport High School, 7:30 a.m.-8:35 a.m.
Project:
February 3, 2016
Date:
Attendees: Lyndon Keck*, Kim LaMarre/Committee Member, Julie Coleman/Committee Member, John
Simoneau/Committee Chairman, Catherine Breer/Committee Member, Kevin Nadeau/Committee
Member, Ed McDonough, Superintendent of School/RSU 5, Dennis Ouelette, Owner’s
Representative/RSU 5, Kelly Wentworth, Business Manager/RSU 5, David Smail/Committee
Member, Brian Campbell/FHS Principal, David Watts/FPAC and Committee Member
Purpose: Building Committee Meeting
These notes were taken by Lyndon Keck. Should you find discrepancies, please notify PDT
Architects as soon as possible.
Topic Agenda/Notes Action
1. No action was taken on the Building Committee meeting notes for January 6,
2016.
2. Changes to January 6, 2016 Meeting Notes: John Simoneau wanted the
previous month’s notes corrected to show there was discussion about
hardware changes, security cameras, and door lock notification systems that
were to be reviewed. At the January Building Committee meeting Lyndon
notified the Committee there had been a meeting over the December
holidays to discuss upgrading hardware and security systems.
David Watts was also present at the January 6, 2016 Building Committee
meeting.
3. John Simoneau opened the meeting by informing the Committee of progress
to date, including removal of unsuitable soils, footing and foundation
concrete work, backfilling and excavation work. He also informed the
Committee of two changes orders that had been processed and one pay
requisition meeting in January.
4. Lyndon confirmed John’s report. He said the work was progressing
satisfactorily. The last requisition was Application #3 where current payment
due was $518,543. Lyndon also explained that there had been an additional
1,000 cubic yards of additional, unsuitable material removed inside the
building footprint, primarily where the Industrial Arts building previously
stood. This represented an additional change order cost of approximately
$29,000-$30,000.
5. Lyndon shared progress being made by the Hardware & Security
Subcommittee. He explained there was a progress drawing that showed
new locations for computerized key fobs, new compartmentalization panic
49 DARTMOUTH STREET PORTLAND , MAINE 0 4 1 0 1 2 0 7 – 7 7 5 – 1 0 5 9 WWW . PDTARCHS . COM
Page 1 of 5

Meeting Notes
Topic Agenda/Notes Action
doors, new cameras and existing door lock replacements. Lyndon also
explained that a system was going to be priced that would be a notification
system for all exterior doors allowing administrative personnel knowledge
when an exterior door was open or left open by mistake.
6. A Committee member requested these drawings be made available to the
Committee members electronically.
7. Lyndon explained that Suzanne had delivered furniture at the high school for
the teachers and staff to test drive, use and comment on. Many of the
pieces of furniture were in the library. The principal, Brian Campbell, briefly
described the furniture teachers preferred and where various tables and
chairs were intended to go. Committee members made their own comments
regarding preferences. Committee members were reminded that an email
with last month’s PowerPoint went out to all Committee members so they
can review Suzanne’s presentation in more detail.
8. After the Committee meeting, Julie Coleman recommended that colors for
chairs be dark colors for the armrests and seats. Samples that have been
delivered were mostly white and were already showing scuff marks and dirt.
9. Lyndon explained that Suzanne would be finishing the development of the
furniture specifications for bidding in February. A final presentation will be
made to the Committee members at their next meeting on Wednesday,
March 2, 2016. Lyndon also explained Suzanne was gathering color
samples for paint, carpet, vinyl tile, lockers, toilet partitions, plastic laminate,
and casework and will be making a presentation at the March meeting.
Lyndon stressed it would be important for all Committee members to try to
attend this meeting; PDT will need to make approvals of colors and return
them to the general contractor in March and April.
10. A question was asked about how much money had been suggested as an
upgrade for security hardware, cameras and hardware system. The
Committee members noted $75,000 had been reserved for keyless entries
and security alarms and another $7,500 for rekeying existing interior doors.
11. Lyndon was asked if they’d done any more engineering work on gutting and
renovating student bathrooms across from the library where a placeholder of
$56,825 had been reserved. Lyndon said no. The Committee members
said this had been approved for PDT to begin working on.
12. A Committee member asked if there had been an update made on any of
the cost estimates to the preliminary estimates passed out in December.
Lyndon said no, but as work was being accomplished we could update the
estimates. Lyndon to deliver upgraded estimates at the next meeting.
49 DARTMOUTH STREET PORTLAND , MAINE 0 4 1 0 1 2 0 7 – 7 7 5 – 1 0 5 9 WWW . PDTARCHS . COM
Page 2 of 5

Meeting Notes
Topic Agenda/Notes Action
13. Lyndon was asked if there were any updates on technology. Lyndon said he
didn’t know of any. Ed McDonough, however, said he had spoken with Seth
and Seth was either within budget or below budget for technology. Seth’s
preference is to use short throw projectors for the existing classrooms.
14. The question was asked if the existing classrooms were being painted in the
100 and 200 Wing. Lyndon said yes.
15. Catherine Breer made an update presentation on the art program inside the
school. Her group recommends removal of the tile mural that presently
exists outside of the administration entrance. The group also recommends
moving the trophy case.
16. Catherine explained there are four planned projects. Additional artists have
been brought on board. The art is as follows:
 Circular art shapes to be located within the cafeteria/food court.
 Square forms to be painted.
 One large rectangular mural to be located above the cubbies
between the stair and food court on the lower level.
 Photography to be printed onto aluminum or metal panels via a
juried selection.
17. Catherine explained that the Art Committee’s hope is that the art teachers
and students will be involved and the projects will be student driven art with
help from professional artists and art teachers.
18. Catherine is hoping to work with PDT to choose colors in the areas where
the artwork could occur so the colors would not clash between the artwork
and building background.
19. Some pieces of art may need blocking in the walls and additional lighting.
PDT to investigate. Lyndon was asked what the cost of art lighting might
cost and he said between $4,000-$15,000.
20. The question was asked if the FPAC lobby was available for either trophy
cases or art. General sense is that it is not.
21. There was discussion about the trophy case and the concept of trying to
continue with trophy cases. A question was posed as to “where do we put
everything”? Catherine suggested trophies and elements related to awards
for academic excellence might be rotated by staff.
22. A suggestion was made to photograph all existing murals or artwork in the
high school so there would be a visual record if this work is to be displaced.
49 DARTMOUTH STREET PORTLAND , MAINE 0 4 1 0 1 2 0 7 – 7 7 5 – 1 0 5 9 WWW . PDTARCHS . COM
Page 3 of 5

Meeting Notes
Topic Agenda/Notes Action
23. David Watts talked about Camden High School which has “walls of fame” for
academic and scholastic achievement. These are simple with small bronze
nameplates that don’t take up too much room within the building.
24. There was discussion about the importance of preserving the school history
and noted that alumni have an investment in their school memories. The
Committee should be careful to find ways to preserve those connections,
whether they be athletic or scholastic.
25. There was discussion about how other schools handle memorabilia related
to sports and academics. PDT Architects to make a brief summary of how
other schools are solving the space problem for trophies, artwork and
scholastic honors.
26. The mural by the administrative wing was constructed in 1986. It was
attached directly to the concrete block wall with epoxy construction adhesive.
It will be almost impossible to removal the mural and keep it intact. It will
very likely be destroyed because to the strength of the adhesive glues.
27. Catherine explained the theme of the artwork was “community and
environment”. Whether it is artwork of photos they want to encourage local
people to be involved. They want local photographers to submit
photographs taken within the three towns. There was discussion about
approaching the Tri-Town newspaper to see if they would be willing to do a
press release to the citizens in Pownal, Durham and Freeport.
28. There was a motion made to endorse the concept of removing the tile mural.
The motion was unanimously approved.
29. The next The next Building Committee meeting will be March 2, 2016 from
7:30 a.m.-9:00 a.m. and will have an emphasis on interior colors and
furnishings
30. The meeting was adjourned at 8:35 a.m.
END OF MEETING NOTES
49 DARTMOUTH STREET PORTLAND , MAINE 0 4 1 0 1 2 0 7 – 7 7 5 – 1 0 5 9 WWW . PDTARCHS . COM
Page 4 of 5

Meeting Notes
49 DARTMOUTH STREET PORTLAND , MAINE 0 4 1 0 1 2 0 7 – 7 7 5 – 1 0 5 9 WWW . PDTARCHS . COM
Page 5 of 5