I wanted to share I spoke with Ayanna. I can share the conversation at the next meeting or via email if that is helpful. Thank you!
Allie Edwards: I have to run to class! Thank you for all the wonderful conversations! Have wonderful summers everyone!
Katie West:  Me too! Take care everyone!  Thank you for all your amazing work.
Michelle Tussing:  I also have to run - thank you, everyone!
Adeline: I have to leave as well to get ready for school, I hope everyone has a good summer!
Maura Pillsbury:  https://www.freeportmaine.com/town-council/events/17806


 May 11, 2021 Agenda


Attendance: Becky, Cynthia, Susana, Erin, Katie Roy, Riley Simon, Victoria, Jen Gulko, Karen Breer, Lindsey, Katie West
Absent:


   1. Welcome new student rep Katie Roy & Riley Simon!
   2. Tri-County Update- Victoria
   1. Book Talk: Uncomfortable Conversations with a Black Man
   2. Committee: Meets every 6 weeks.
   3. Q &A : Community members have developed questions and will send them in advance to Becky. We will share these with this committee.
   4. Could committee members meet with school administrators? To perhaps fill any gaps?
   5. Retreat with new members.
   3. Update CCI
   1. Last night was the last official class
   1. Offering one on June 3
   2. This will be focused on hiring
   2. 400 participants across the State
   3. Last night was focused on mentorship and how to support one another
   4. Helpful to have a network from across the State
   5. Across the State good work. There is a lot of burn out and wondering how to proceed forward. How do we embed the work in what we are currently doing? Some are singletons trying to move the work. If Boards are not supportive, how does the work move forward? The work is ongoing and never finished.
   6. Jen and Erin shared the work they are doing at the high school and its focus on equity and getting students back to school 5 days a week. 
   4. Reopening Schools (TABLED from last meeting)
   1. To clarify: we have offered a remote learning option all year for students including those that are medically compromised.
   2. Respect the letter, different viewpoints.
   3. As a Board, we are hopefully digging in.
   4. Many different viewpoints. As a parent I felt I wanted to keep hybrid as an option and felt I didn’t have a voice/choice. However, now my kids love being back full time.
   5. Will we respond to the student’s letter? Yes, the Board chair responds.  Another Board member received a communication from her pushing that this letter be discussed at this committee meeting. Susana may respond to her communication. A committee member asked “what does she really want?” Susana is willing to respond and reach out to her. Student (friend) may reach out. Victoria is happy to reach out as well and have a conversation.
   6. Committee member: Childcare is a lens that was considered when bringing students back to school five days a week. We have 25% below poverty level. This wasn’t considered in the letter.
   7. Reminder, that none of our students have contracted COVID-19 while in school that we know of. The best we can do for our students is to get our students in school five days a week. 
   8. Letter doesn’t represent all sides to the issue.  Doesn’t have an element of reconciliation.
   9. Student: I wonder what she is thinking now, a month after we have been back? Another student agreed.
   10. Student: Some generalizations in the letter may not be accurate.
   11. Develop a statement that our decision to return to school five days a week stands behind equity.
   5. Survey Results from PD - Cynthia  (Tabled due to time)
   1. Session 3
   6. Board Presentation - MAEC 
   1. May 12, 2021
   7. Belief Statement (Tabled) 
   1. Please read
   8. Next agenda: 
   1. Curriculum checklist
   2. Tri-County Update
   3. MAEC next steps
 


      April 13, 2021 Agenda




Attendance: Becky, Cynthia, Erin, Victoria, Karen, Julie, Lindsey, Adeline, Jen, Michelle, Susana, Katie, Allie,
Absent:   Truheart, 
Not sure if Truheart will attend. Riley Simmonds and Katie Roy both applied. Jen will reach out to them. 
   1. Tri-County Update- Victoria
   1. Community Book Group: Uncomfortable Conversations with a Black Man by Emmanuel Acho, May 5 at 7 p.m.  His YouTube videos on this topic,    Register: https://forms.gle/AvroG68fg53ahcBg9  Victoria would like us to forward this out.  They are trying to get a website together that will house events.
   2. Update on the introduction TTEIC & ACAF made with MSS and MLS with the Wabanaki Center.  John Bear Mitchell, Wabanaki Center, Storytelling w/MLS. Certificate in Wabanaki Studies. Fiona Hopper has put together a Wabanaki curriculum. Emily has a copy.
   1. TTEIC met. Working on our principles. Working on governance and structure. People are reaching out to Librarians to support book selection to help support the school. 
   3. Other
   2. Update from CCI (Cultural Competence Institute)
   1. Belief statement - A subgroup of the CCI will be drafting a common belief statement that we all can refer back to. We will bring it back to the full CCI group and the DEI Committee
   2. Universal tool for all work - not a separate equity goal- 
   1. We will use this tool across all areas. Everything will run through the lens of equity. We have another CCI  subgroup working on developing this tool. Julie Nickerson et. al. This will be brought to the full CCI and DEI committee. We envision using this for units, clubs, hiring, etc. This will likely be an ever-evolving document.  Help to create systemic change.  Include 7a. in the checklist process. Katie: gave an example of something being shown in school that was anti-Arabic. Can teachers check each other or check-in with an administrator. Victoria- could this be labeled “Accountability”?
   3. Flow chart - Board, School, Admin, etc.
   1. This will be created and brought back to the group. 


   3. Reopening Schools (TABLED)
   4. Open committee meetings
   1. Becky shared outside interest in 2 people joining our committee. Currently there is not a space on the committee. Does this group want to allow others to participate? If so, how formal do you want to be? Should there be a public comment time? Should we publicize that these are open meetings? Also, how much do we want them to participate? Inclusivity vs. Trust- Lindsey:  Maybe refer them to TTIC?  Victoria desires a safe space.
   5. Cultural needs assessment for curriculum & other MAEC updates - Cynthia update 
   1. PD: All staff -March 12, April 28- Board workshop, June 15 
   1. Lots of good engagement. Recognizing internal bias. This was just the jump start for further work. There will be a similar workshop with the Board. On June 15th, there will be further work with community programs, nutrition, and transportation/custodian. This will be separate for them, and address their specific needs. 
   2. Curriculum checklist refer to 2B 
   3. Policy work - we have sent several policies to MAEC. They (MAEC) have sent back comments for possible revisions, and also about sending communications in multiple languages, or sending emails to parents. MAEC has sent several questions for consideration when reviewing the policies. 
   6. Remaining Meetings for 20/21:  May 11 and June 8 
   7. Other
   1. Michelle expressed concern of going to the child first instead of the parent. How do we keep in mind not to over target students (of color) and go to the parent first.  Be mindful of unintentionally doing more harm than good. E.g. Just for black students at the middle school. What is this?  Who is running it? Is there a need? What is the objective of this group?  Another example: Outside interviewer wanting to interview black students.
   2. We can have a conversation at the administration level. 
   3. Lindsey: Equity officer to help level-up other identified building resource people. This was #2 recommendation from MAEC. Victoria agreed.
   4. Victoria- Were there survey results from the PD on March 12- yes. Cynthia will have those for the next meeting.














Join by telephone:   1 646 876 9923  DEI Committee Agenda
March 9, 2021
7:00 am - 8:00 am
Join Zoom Meeting
https://networkmaine.zoom.u
s/j/83955767193
Meeting ID: 839 5576 7193
Join by telephone:   1 646 876 9923




Attendance: Cynthia, Becky, Karen, Victoria, Erin, Jen, Adeline, Lindsey, Katherine, Ada, Julie, Susana, 


Absent: Allie,


   * Meeting times
   1. Possibly having 2 students from the high school- Jen will reach out to other students. Having an additional student would help students feel more comfortable. Becky will look to see if there were other students who applied.
   2. We will maintain the time of 7 AM.


   * Tri-County Update - Victoria
   1. It’s been hard to get up and running. We have added more members. At MS level we had some training from Bowdoin. Phyllis Latham helped to coordinate this. At Elem school, we have made a connection with the Wabanaki Center (contact- John at UMaine) and we are working with Emily and Julie and hope to loop in Pownal. Not quite sure how to pull in Durham. We are very excited about this partnership.
   2. At the town level, the DEI Committee just started. The town of Freeport completed the 21-day challenge in January.  (podcasts/readings)
   3. Victoria is willing to share the resource list so that they can be shared with the administrators. Victoria will send it to alexanderc@rsu5.org.
   4. Katie suggested making a connection with Fiona Hopper.
   * Continuation of discussion of audit/update of next steps  MAEC Report


   5. Strategic plan:  
   1. District Equity Goal - This goal is broad at this time. In August we will provide more details for the next year.  Jen added that each school also has additional goals that are more detailed.  We will link all of the building level equity goals.
   6. Policies-  Cynthia
   1. Sent several policies to MAEC in the fall. MAEC has reviewed and provided comments for the Policy Committee to consider. Sent five additional policies for review around Title IX. Regulations for Title IX changed in the past year. Drummond Woodsum have rewritten these policies, and they have been adopted by the Board. They are currently being used. The Policy Committee will begin with the student facing policies such as the expulsion policy and review. They will then be reviewed by the lawyers. This will take at least a year to review and revise. Some are simple upgrades; others will take more discussion. 
   2. All policies have now been reviewed in the past five years. 
   7. PD for all staff. 
   1. Update about PD on Friday
   1. This Friday we have a professional learning day. There are 90 minute sessions for all staff throughout the day. Karmen will give a slight overview of the work thus far. She has some interactive activities she will be using. The first goal is for us to recognize our implicit biases. There will also be breakout sessions for each group to discuss in smaller groups. 
   2. Is training also available to parents/guardians? Where to find information? 
   3. Give a brief outline to the parents. 
   4. If we receive pushback on Friday. NSBA - DIRE (Deconstructing Institutional ?Racism)- even though focus groups would be small, we have support on the State and National levels. 
   5. Some of us All by Heather McGee
   8. Conduct periodic community forums with parents/stakeholders- check-ins
   1. What does this look like?
   2. Recommendations?
   1. Bring in an outside presentation or facilitator so people can feel like they are getting something from it. -Victoria
   2. Have it across all schools.
   3. Add in newsletters (link)- Julie (Dur)  Include PLD 
   4. Surveys for parents and students- Lindsey  
   5. Announce in advisory
   6. Student Forums at the high school - Jen
   7. Create a specific caucus (Create a specific container) - Katie
   1. BIPOC (Black, Indigenious and People of Color)
   2. Splitting groups- does that create more harm?
   3. Parents of Children of Color - specific invitation to this group


   9. Cultural needs assessment for curriculum - Cynthia update (TABLE)
   10. Next meeting: April 13, 2021




Resources:
https://www.amazon.com/Sum-Us-Everyone-Prosper-Together/dp/0525509569
White Awake-David Dean-Roots deeper than whiteness






Join by telephone:   1 646 876 9923  DEI Committee Agenda
February 9, 2021
7:00 am - 8:00 am
Join Zoom Meeting
https://networkmaine.zoom.u
s/j/83955767193
Meeting ID: 839 5576 7193
Join by telephone:   1 646 876 9923  


Committee Members: Allie Edwards, Erin Abbott, Jen Gulko, Julie Labbay, Katie West, Karen Breer, Michelle Tussing, Adeline Benica, TruHeart Peeples, Lindsey Furtney, Susana Hancock, Becky Foley, Cynthia Alexander, Victoria Winters


Attendance: Karen Breer, Becky Foley, Julie Labbay, Erin Abbott, Michelle Tussing, Susana Hancock, Cynthia Alexander, Lindsey Furtney, Allie Edwards, Jen Gulko, Katie West, Adeline Benica, Lindsey Furtney


Absent: Victoria Winters, Truheart Peeples 




   *  Develop Working Norms  
   * Trust collective wisdom and give some time and thought to ideas before passing judgment.
   * Be conscious of your own and others’ assumptions, and always go to the source to seek accurate information. 
   * Assume good intentions, especially during the busiest and most stressful times. Intentions do not negate impact. 
   * Maintain confidentiality concerning students, educators, and families with whom we work.
   * Express a Growth Mindset. We have to support our learning by accepting and encouraging each other to learn from mistakes as well as from success. Do not try and avoid the discomfort around difficult conversations. 
   * Centering the participations or experiences of those most impacted by the topic at hand. 
   *    *  Tri-town Equity Update - Victoria  
   *  Other updates 
   * March 12th professional development - Cynthia
   * Professional development day - contracting with MAEC - they will be providing pd over time. First day will be on Mar. 12 via zoom. 90 minutes for each session. All staff will attend. First initial will be focused on work thus far, summary of MAEC’s report, internal bias and some self-reflective work. What might be our own internal bias. Series over time. 
   * Civil Rights Teams - in the proposed budget
   * All schools will have stipend. DCS will 
   * At high school, this has evolved through student interest. Some years it has not run. Creating the stipend, will ensure that there will be a team every year at the high school. Trying to gather membership at the moment. Clubs meet during the day. Last week they showed the “I have a Dream” speech. Then had a discussion about the video. Small group currently.  Also been connecting with the Tri-town Equity Committee. 
When and how will conversations take place at the high school. Some of it is due to timing, due to open campus, due to feeling safe.
   * Future meeting times
   * This time works well for most of the adults in this group.
   * Students at the highschool would need a ride to school at this time.  Work and athletics may impact participation. High Schoolers may not love the 7AM time.  Adeline can do 4 PM
   * Backup time would be at 6:30 PM
   * We will continue next month at 7:00 AM and check in with Victoria to see about a switch to 6:30.
   * Continuation of discussion of audit/next steps  MAEC Report
   * Intentionally engage with families that historically have been harder to reach, etc.   (to partner with families and build supports)
   * There are parents that had difficulty themselves in school  or had negative experiences with school which may  deter them from engaging.
   * Michelle: Continue to seek feedback along the way.  There are many challenges to participation currently.
   * Providing food may be a way to engage parents.
   * Provide resources for parents to assist them with what their children can be reading.
   * District Equity Goal




DEI Committee Agenda
January 12, 2021
7:00 am - 8:00 am
Join Zoom Meeting
https://networkmaine.zoom.us/j/83955767193
Meeting ID: 839 5576 7193
Join by telephone:   1 646 876 9923       




Committee Members: Allie Edwards, Erin Abbott, Jen Gulko, Julie Labbay, Katie West, Karen Breer, Michelle Tussing, Adeline Benica, TruHeart Peeples, Lindsey Furtney, Susana Hancock, Becky Foley, Cynthia Alexander, Victoria Winters


Attendance:  Cynthia, Becky, Karen, Victoria, Allie, Erin, Lindsey, Susana, Katie, Julie, Jen, Michelle
Absent: TruHeart, Adeline
Guest: Karmen Rouland 


   1.  Welcome - Becky
   1. State of the country- encourage collaboration, speak the truth with data, condemn violent acts, examine current practices
   2. Consultant will review MAEC Report  findings with group - Karmen Rouland
   1. Karmen’s review- Karmen shared powerpoint
   1. Look at entire system
   1. Policies- These are the structures
   1. Looking at the second round of policies now
   2. Focus Groups (30-90 participants)
   1. Served as 1st part of the needs assessment
   2. Overarching findings
   1. Need for PD on all equity aspects for staff
   2. Successfully meeting tech needs of all families- This was a positive! District went far and beyond to meet needs.
   3. Mistrust between students/families of color and their district (Do they feel like their voices are being heard)
   4. Including the voice of students and the community (May do a climate survey with students). Karmen suggested going to high school groups to ask questions. E.g. RSVP, LGBTQ, Civil Rights, etc. 
   1. Other voices: 1-1 interview
   2. Homogeneous groups
   5. Mislabeling racial harassment/bias
   1. E.g. discipline/consequences
   6. Successfully supported families during COVID
   1. Spec Ed was an area to focus however.
   7. Teachers are unsure of how to support LGBTQIA+
   8. Communication with parents across schools in the district. Lack of transparency at school level. Some schools are better at it than others. 
   2. Recommendations (see report for details)
   1. This committee will serve as the task force. We need to reexamine meeting times to be sure student members are more likely to attend. May give a special invitation to others to join.  May want sub committees as well. Include a member of low SES. May want to include alumni. May want a commitment for a year.
   2. Equity officer- to focus the work.
   3. Strategic plan:  for equity and diversity. We added a goal. 
   4. Policies- may make revisions. Also provide PD around these policies to staff.
   5. PD for all staff. Karmen starts off with an “intro to equity” then bias, privilege; bullying training, responsive leaders  (March 12) - split the day or do 2 hour sessions
   6. Conduct periodic community forums with parents/stakeholders- check-ins
   7. Family engagement practices (families felt we were doing great things).  
   8. Opportunities for engaging 
   9. Cultural needs assessment for curriculum (provide a checklist.)


   2. Q & A from committee members
   3. Karmen will:
   1. Meet w/Cynthia to set up PD for March 12
   2. Join us on March 
   3. Send us the curriculum checklist
   3. Updates (Tabled to February)
   4.    1.  Tri-town Equity - Victoria  (Tabled to February)
   2.  Other updates  (Tabled to February)




Next meeting:
Agenda: Discuss the time we meet












DEI Committee Agenda
12.8.20
7:00 am - 8:00 am
Join Zoom Meeting
https://networkmaine.zoom.us/j/83955767193
Meeting ID: 839 5576 7193
Join by telephone:   1 646 876 9923       




Committee Members: Allie Edwards, Erin Abbott, Jen Gulko, Julie Labbay, Katie West, Karen Breer, Michelle Tussing, Adeline Benica, TruHeart Peeples, Lindsey Furtney, Susana Hancock, Becky Foley, Cynthia Alexander, Victoria Winters


Attendance: Becky, Cynthia, Lindsey, Karen, Adeline, Susana, Jen, Erin, Julie, Katie, Victoria
Absent: Allie Edwards, TruHeart Peeples, Michelle Tussing




   5. Introductions:  Say your name, position and complete this sentence starter “I am……”   Example: I am Becky Foley, superintendent in RSU 5.  I am a quilter, a descendant of German grandparents, and a passionate educator.
   6. Purpose of the committee:
   1.  “Committee Charge:
   1. Whereas the RSU5 Board of Directors recognizes the importance of promoting practices that strengthen diversity, equity, and inclusion within RSU 5, we hereby charge the RSU5 Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion Advisory Committee (DEI) with creating a culture in RSU 5 where diversity, equity, and inclusion are respected and celebrated through the implementation of thoughtful, iterative, and innovative strategies that inspire an inclusive mindset in RSU5 employees, students, and community members. RSU 5 will strive to transform our community into a place where each individual will thrive and grow as they are recognized for their inherent value in an evolving world.”
   2. Decision-Making Considerations:
   1. The DEI will strive to build consensus among committee members when making recommendations to the RSU5 Board of Directors.  Final authority for all decisions relating to the equity plan rests with the RSU5 Board of Directors.
   3. Questions/Comments - none at this time
   7. Updates
   1. District Equity Goal - reviewed this goal. Waiting for the audit findings at the moment. 
   2. Cultural Competence Institute: 
   1. Ten staff enrolled: eight administrators and two staff members. Once a month from 6-7:30 pm we attend a Zoom event with 290 educators across the state with Lawrence Alexander as facilitator.  
   2. At each administrative meeting we bring our learning from CCI to the larger administrative team meeting for learning/discussion.
   3. All schools in RSU 5 have an equity goal. - many are waiting for audit findings. 
   4. Audit from MAEC: Mid-Atlantic Educational Consortium 
   1. Good turnout on the focus groups.
   2. MAEC will provide consultation and training. 
   3. Full report should be completed by the end of the week. Consultant is willing to come to our meetings to answer questions. 
   4. Will be making recommendations on certain policies. We have sent them the Title IX policy through the lens of equity. 
   5. Contract is a two year contract. Much of the professional development will begin next year or possibly in the spring. 
   5. Tri-Town Equity and Inclusion Committee - Victoria Winters 
   1. A. Founded by 8 people who reside in Freeport, but it is inclusive of Pownal and Durham. This was created after the Black Lives Matter protests this spring. 
   2. Purpose of the committee is to raise awareness to create an inclusive community for everyone. 
   3. Have sub-committees: Town Committee, RSU 5 committee. 
   4. Have met with all of the Freeport based schools, and reaching out to the other two schools. Want to be of service and to be a support. Civil Rights Teams have been a natural fit. 
   5. Community group - anti-racist challenge for 21 days. Curated by one of the parents. Begins January 17th. Can register through RSU 5 Community Programs. Connie Clifford is the point person on this. Middle school and high school are thinking of doing their own variety of this. Here is the link: https://rsu5cp.myrec.com/info/activities/program_details.aspx?ProgramID=30066
   6. Membership of the groups are growing. If you know of people interested, please contact Victoria Winters or Lindsey  Furtney. 
   6. At high school, have a Civil Rights Team - morphed into two different clubs. Looking at having students empowered but need some adult direction. Cumberland County principals meet on Fridays who have active Civil Rights Clubs. Some students perceive it as a club for  elementary students. They are looking at giving it a different name. 
   7. Questions/Comments
   8. Audit Findings Thus Far 
   1. Questions/Comments
   1. Lots of rich discussion among the committee about not being surprised that it was not recognized by students, but by parents. There is a need for professional development for staff in how to have difficult conversations. A book was recommended as a starting point: So You Want to Talk about Race. The high school staff just finished a book study on this book and found it helpful. There is a need to find specific professional development for communities that have the same demographics as ours. Also important to teach our students how to be allies to minority populations. 
   2. Full audit findings should be available by the next meeting. Will try and get it to committee members in advance so we can be prepared with questions. 
   9. Next Steps in Audit
   1. Meet with the Associate Director and sign agreements for data sharing
   1. E.g. De-identify where needed
   2. Collect and submit other data for review
   1. Discipline
   2. Survey data
   3. Attendance
   4. Climate data
   5. Achievement data (E.g. Scorecards)
   3. Meet with consultant in late December to determine next steps
   4. Assistant Superintendent Cynthia Alexander submitted student-facing policies as part of the audit and will meet with MAEC to review annotations from policies in January/February
   5. Questions, Comments
   10. Next meeting: 
   1. Time: January 12, 2021 7-8 am
   2. Agenda Items
   1. Consultant will review audit findings with group
   2. Updates
   1. Tri-town Equity
   2. Other updates