SOURCE: https://www.rsu5.org/fs/resource-manager/view/d5778e81-f727-4a69-9bfe-fca8778b4437
SECTION: /budget/fy27
TITLE: Planning for the Future Presentation
TYPE: Finalsite-PDF
============================================================

Regional School Unit 5 Feb 2026
Planning for the Future of
RSU 5
February 11, 2026
Tom Gray, Superintendent of Schools
Planning for the Future RSU 5 Feb 2026
Balancing Programming, Community, and Sustainability
● Several Converging Factors Require Deep, Long-Term Thinking…
○ Ongoing Financial Pressures
○ Educational Opportunities– what do our kids need in the
future?
○ Early Childhood Mandates– long-term expansion of our
responsibility
● This is an exploratory conversation– seeking Board guidance
Next– Purpose and Priorities

Planning for the Future RSU 5 Feb 2026
Purpose and Priorities
● Primary Focus: Enhancing Educational Opportunities for Students
The needs of students should always come first.
● Secondary Consideration: Financial Sustainability in an Inflationary
Environment
Goal– Determine which ideas to explore further
Planning for the Future RSU 5 Feb 2026
Lenses Through Which to View All Scenarios
● Early Childhood Programming: Requirement to serve all 3- and
4-year-olds with IEPs by July 2027 (we’re committed to Cohort 3)
● Middle School Equity and Expansion of Opportunities: ensuring
consistency for all district students, and possibly expanding the
vision for how we approach middle-level education
● Financial Sustainability– Short-term v. Long-term costs in
inflationary times
● Community Identity– Town connections
Next- Early Childhood Considerations

Planning for the Future RSU 5 Feb 2026
Considerations for Early Childhood Programming
● We have space for the 4-year-olds, but where do we put the
3-year-olds in 2027?
● Distribution of services across the district
● Half-Day (currently have) v. Full-Day (should we offer in future?)
Cannot overstate the importance, and long-term benefits, of getting
this right. The payoff will be immediate for families, and longitudinal
for students.
Next- Middle School Considerations
Planning for the Future RSU 5 Feb 2026
Considerations for Middle School Programming
● Consistency and congruence for academics, including robust MTSS
● Equity for Athletics and Extracurriculars
● Opportunity for all students to integrate Before high school
● Possibilities for expanding our vision of Middle Level Education…
○ STEM/CTE (possibility to embed a teacher from Region 10)
○ World Language– ensure access for all students grades 7 and 8
○ Interdisciplinary models become easier with all district
students in one location
Next- Financial Sustainability

Planning for the Future RSU 5 Feb 2026
Financial Sustainability Lens
● Short-term investments v. long-term operational savings
● Impact of inflation on deferred decisions
● Efficiency of consolidated v. dislocated programming
● Facility maintenance and utilization across the district
This lens should be a consideration, but not the primary impetus for
decisions. Financial implications are always hard to predict precisely.
Next– The Importance of Community Identity
Planning for the Future RSU 5 Feb 2026
Importance of Community Identity
● Each school is an expression of community identity and history
● Family and Neighborhood Connections
● Historical Relationships to School Buildings
● Feelings Must Be Considered Alongside Ideas
Community Identity Lives in Each RSU 5 School
Next– Details of Scenario 1: Current Configuration

Planning for the Future RSU 5 Feb 2026
Scenario 1: Maintain Current District Configuration
● For Durham–
○ PreK - Gr. 8: Durham Community School
○ Grades 9-12: Freeport High School
● For Freeport–
○ PreK - Gr. 2: Morse Street School
○ Gr. 3 - Gr. 5: Mast Landing School
○ Gr. 6 - Gr. 8: Freeport Middle School
○ Gr. 9 - Gr. 12: Freeport High School
● For Pownal–
○ PreK - Gr. 5: Pownal Elementary School
○ Gr. 6 - Gr. 8: Freeport Middle School
○ Gr. 9 - Gr. 12: Freeport High School
Next– What we preserve
Planning for the Future RSU 5 Feb 2026
Scenario 1: What We Preserve With Current District Configuration
● Community Schools and Town Identity
○ Neighborhood Schools Remain Sources of Town Pride and Identity
○ Family Traditions and Local Engagement Continue
● Early Childhood in Each Town
○ Each Town has Public PreK
○ Current configuration provides a soft entry to public school in each town; eliminates
an early transition
● The Least Change in the Short Term
○ Our facilities are presently used in this configuration
○ Staffing configurations are adapted to this model
We cannot ignore the intangibles– community sentiment is a legitimate, important
consideration.
Next– Limitations of Current District Configuration

Planning for the Future RSU 5 Feb 2026
Scenario 1: Limitations of Current District Configuration
● Early Childhood Inefficiencies and Space Concerns
○ Services and staffing across multiple locations is inefficient
○ More Limited Ability to Offer Full Day Programming
○ Commitment to serve 3-yos with IEPs by July 2027– with no viable space solution
● Middle School Inconsistency and Inequity
○ Academic Offerings are inconsistent between FMS and DCS
○ Inequities for extracurriculars and athletics between FMS and DCS
○ Students enter high school without benefits of a full-district integration experience
(especially for DCS students)
● Overall Financial Sustainability– What is the Long-Term Trajectory?
○ Operating multi-purpose facilities in an inflationary environment
○ Duplicating staff and resources in multiple locations, sometimes paying mileage
reimbursements
○ Inefficiencies of current model
Next– The Fundamental Question
Planning for the Future RSU 5 Feb 2026
Scenario 1: The Fundamental Question
Can we address the Early Childhood mandate, middle school
inequities, and financial pressures while maintaining the
status quo?
Or does preserving what we value most require us to consider change?
Next– Alternative Considerations

Planning for the Future RSU 5 Feb 2026
Why Consider Alternatives (when this proposal is likely to cause
concern for some)?
● The Early Childhood Mandate requires us to take some level of action regardless.
● Middle School programming gaps are real, and force us to reckon with inequities
● Budgetary Pressures in an Inflationary Environment Demand a Responsible
Conversation, Even If it is Hard
● Having This Conversation Now Coincides with Strategic Planning
● No Matter Where the Conversation Starts, Who Knows What Ideas Will Emerge?
Next– Scenario #2 The Pownal Early Childhood Center
Planning for the Future RSU 5 Feb 2026
Scenario 2: The Pownal Early Childhood Center
A new configuration involving modest facilities investment, some change in each town,
and strong focus on Early Childhood and Middle Level Education.
● PES → District-wide PreK/Preschool Center
● Pownal K–6 → DCS
● DCS 7–8 → FMS
● FMS → District-wide 7–8 Middle School
● MLS → Transition to Freeport Grades 4-6
● MSS → Transition to Freeport Grades K-3 (PreK to Pownal)
● FHS → No change (district-wide Gr. 9-12)
Next– Scenario #2 Programming Benefits

Planning for the Future RSU 5 Feb 2026
Scenario 2: Programming Benefits
● Real Investment in Early Childhood, with Potential for Expansive Programming
○ Consolidated services and expertise at dedicated facility
○ Full-day PreK/Preschool possibilities
○ Expanded outdoor/play-based programming potential
○ Solves 3-year-old space requirement (2027 commitment for Cohort 3)
○ Enhanced developmental supports through co-location
● Middle School Integration
○ All 7-8 students together with consistent offerings
○ Full extracurricular/athletic integration
○ Equal access to consistent academic program
○ Preparation for high school transition as unified cohort
Next– Scenario #2 Financial Considerations and Community Impact
Planning for the Future RSU 5 Feb 2026
Financial Considerations
● Single early childhood facility v. multiple sites
● Long-term operational efficiencies possible
● Consolidated middle school programming
● Reduced duplication of resources and staffing
Community Impact
● Significant change to Pownal identity — loss of K-5 neighborhood school
● District-wide middle school creates new shared identity
● Freeport primary grade adjustments needed
● Early childhood center becomes district-wide resource, with potential to magnetize
Next– Scenario #3 Districtwide Grade 6 at Pownal Elementary

Planning for the Future RSU 5 Feb 2026
Scenario 3: District-Wide 6th Grade at Pownal Elementary School
This scenario focuses on middle level consolidation and extends to integration of all
students to sixth grade, while leaving all earlier grades, including early childhood, as
they are.
● PES → Becomes a sixth grade school, focusing on experiential learning, for the entire
district.
● Pownal PreK–5 → DCS
● DCS 6 → PES, 7–8 →FMS
● FMS → District-wide 7–8 Middle School, Present Freeport Gr 6 → PES
● MLS → Freeport Gr. 3-5 (no change)
● MSS → Freeport PreK. - Gr. 2 (no change)
● FHS → No change (district-wide Gr. 9-12)
Next– Scenario #3 Programming Benefits
Planning for the Future RSU 5 Feb 2026
Scenario 3: Programming Benefits
Unique Grade 6 Experience
● Potential for experiential/outdoor education focus
● Project-based learning opportunities
● Bridge year between elementary and middle school
Middle School Integration
● Unified 7-8 programming with full consistency
● Earlier district integration starting at grade 6
● Equal access to athletics, extracurriculars, and academics
● Strong peer cohort for high school transition
Next– Scenario #3 Shortcomings and Considerations

Planning for the Future RSU 5 Feb 2026
Scenario 3: Possible Shortcomings and Considerations
Financial Considerations
● Middle school efficiencies achieved
● Grade 6 program may require specialized resources, and requires ALL programs at PES (Art,
Music, WL, FLS, Special Education, PE, etc.)
● Early childhood inefficiencies remain, and offers no solution for 3 yos.
Community Impact
● Still represents disproportionate change for Pownal
● New shared identity for grades 6-8
● Does not fully solve early childhood challenges
Next– Trade offs and Tension
Planning for the Future RSU 5 Feb 2026
Trade-offs and Tensions– This presentation is intended to
acknowledge complexities.
● Programming opportunities v. community tradition
● Short-term costs v. long-term sustainability
● Centralized services v. distributed access
● Mandated requirements v. local preferences
● Student equity v. familiar structures
A true dilemma is never a “right v. wrong,” it is always a “right v. right.”
Next– Questions - Board Guidance

Planning for the Future RSU 5 Feb 2026
Questions for Board Guidance…
● Which factors are most important in your decision-making?
● Do the potential benefits of change justify exploring new models?
● How do we balance the 2027 Early Childhood commitment with
community values, needs, and preferences?
● Which option(s) warrant deeper operational analysis?
● Where would you like to go from here?
Next– Considerations for the Short Term
Planning for the Future RSU 5 Feb 2026
Considerations for the Short Term (starting this school year)…
● Board discussion and initial guidance tonight
● Fleshing out ideas takes time, effort, and investment (e.g., Early Childhood). Do
we invest in fleshing out concepts?
● If yes…
○ Which ideas shall we pursue?
○ How shall we engage the community– ALL communities?
○ Timeline for decision-making? (considering the July 2027 commitment)?
● Ongoing communication with stakeholders
Each Scenario Requires Community Engagement