SOURCE: https://www.rsu5.org/fs/resource-manager/view/b7828912-9807-4188-b263-1ebce3622aa6
SECTION: /departments/health-services
TITLE: Administration of Medication to Students Policy JLCD
TYPE: Finalsite-PDF
============================================================

NEPN/NSBA Code: JLCD
ADMINISTRATION OF MEDICATION TO STUDENTS
The Board discourages the administration of medication to students during the school day when
other options exist, but recognizes that in some instances it may be necessary for a student to
have medication administered to him/her while the student is in attendance at school. The school
will not deny educational opportunities to students requiring the administration of medication in
order to remain in attendance and participate in the educational program.
The intent of this policy is to promote the safe administration of medications to students by
school personnel and to provide for authorization of student self-administration of emergency
medication for Asthma, Anaphylaxis and Diabetes.
This policy does not apply to medical marijuana, which is addressed in RSU No. 5 Board’s
policy JLCDA, Medical Marijuana in Schools.
The Board encourages collaboration between parents/guardians and the schools in matters
involving student medication.
The Board disclaims any and all responsibility for the diagnosis, prescription of treatment, and
administration of medication for any student, and for any injury arising from a student’s self-
administration of medication.
I. DEFINITIONS
“Administration” means the provision of prescribed medication to a student according to
the orders of a health care provider.
“Health care provider” means a medical/health practitioner who has a current license in
the State of Maine with a scope of practice that includes prescribing medication.
“Indirect supervision” means the supervision of an unlicensed school staff member when
the school nurse or other health care provider is not physically available on site, but
immediately available by telephone.
“Individual Health Plan” means a plan developed by the school nurse, student and family
to provide care coordination and facilitate the management of the student’s health
condition in the school setting and to inform school educational plans.
“Medication” means prescribed drugs and medical devices that are controlled by the U.S.
Food and Drug Administration and are ordered by a health care provider. It includes
over-the-counter medications prescribed through a standing order by the school physician
or prescribed by the student’s health care provider. For the purpose of this policy,
“medication” does not include medical marijuana.
“Parent” means a natural or adoptive parent, a guardian, or a person acting as a parent of
a child with legal responsibility for the child’s welfare.
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 1 of 8

NEPN/NSBA Code: JLCD
“School nurse” means a registered professional nurse with Maine Department of
Education certification for school nursing.
“Self-administration” is when the student administers medication independently to
him/herself under indirect supervision of the school nurse.
“Unlicensed school personnel” are persons who do not have a professional license that
allows them, within the scope of that license, to administer medication.
II. ADMINISTRATION OF MEDICATION BY SCHOOL PERSONNEL
A. Parental Request
In the event that no reasonable alternative exists, the parent/guardian may request
in writing that medication be administered to the student during the school
day. The written request must include an acknowledgement and agreement that
unlicensed personnel may administer the medication as per the health care
provider’s instructions. In addition, the request shall indicate that information
regarding the student’s medication may be shared with appropriate school
personnel. Parents may provide the reason (diagnosis) requiring the
administration of medication.
Requests shall be valid for the current school year only.
B. Health Care Provider’s Order
All parental requests must be accompanied by a written order from the student’s
Health Care Provider substantiating the fact that the administration of a particular
medication during the school day is necessary for the student’s health and
attendance in school. Such order must include the:
1. Student’s name
2. Name of the medication
3. Dose
4. Route of administration (e.g., tablets, liquid, drops); and
5. Time intervals for administration (e.g., every four hours, before meals)
6. Special instructions; and
7. Name of the prescribing Health Care Provider
It is the responsibility of the school nurse to clarify any medication order that
he/she believes to be inappropriate or ambiguous. In accordance with Department
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 2 of 8

NEPN/NSBA Code: JLCD
of Education Rule Chapter 40 § 2(B), the school nurse may decline to administer
a medication if he/she believes such administration would jeopardize student
safety. In this case, the school nurse must notify the parent, the student’s health
care provider and the school administrator (i.e., building principal or designated
administrator).
If the student’s parent or health care provider indicates that he/she does not want a
medication administered by unlicensed personnel, a meeting or telephone
conference will be held involving the school nurse, the building administrator, the
parent(s), and appropriate professionals to discuss alternative options for
administration of medication to the student.
C. Renewal of Parent Permission Requests/Forms and Health Care Provider Orders
Written parental permission requests/forms and health care provider orders must
be renewed at least annually. Health care provider orders must be renewed
whenever there are changes in the order.
D. Delivery and Storage of Medication
The student’s parents shall deliver any medication to be administered by school
personnel to the school in its original container and properly labeled. In the event
that this is not practical, the parent must contact the school to make alternate
arrangements. The parent is responsible for the replenishment of medication kept
at school.
The school nurse is responsible for accepting all medications, and will determine
the amount of medication that will be kept at school to manage the student’s
health condition.
Scheduled medications (regulated by the Federal Narcotics Act) will not be
accepted at school unless it is part of a student’s Individual Health Plan agreed
upon by the physician, parent, school nurse and administrator.
The parent is responsible for notifying the school of any changes in or
discontinuation of a prescribed medication that is being administered to the
student at school. The parent must remove any medication no longer required or
that remains at the end of the school year. Any medication remaining will be
appropriately discarded by the school nurse.
The school nurse in conjunction with principal and/or designated school official
shall be responsible for developing and implementing procedures for the
appropriate and secure storage of medications kept at school, and all medications
shall be stored in accordance with this procedure.
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 3 of 8

NEPN/NSBA Code: JLCD
E. Recordkeeping
School personnel and the student’s parent shall account for all medication brought
to school. The number of capsules, pills, tablets, and/or volume of scheduled
medications brought to school shall be recorded.
School staff administering medication shall document each instance the
medication is administered including the date, time, and dosage given.
The school nurse shall maintain a record including the parent’s request,
physician’s order, details of the specific medications (including dosage and timing
of medication), and documentation of each instance the medication is
administered.
Records shall be retained according to the current State of Maine schedules
pertaining to student health records.
F. Confidentiality
To the extent legally permissible, staff members may be provided with such
information regarding medication and its administration as may be in the best
interest of the student.
G. Administration of Medication
Medication may be administered during the school day by licensed medical
personnel acting within the scope of their licenses.
The school nurse, under the administrative supervision of the Superintendent, will
provide direction and oversight for the administration of medication to students.
All unlicensed personnel (principals, teachers, education technicians, school
secretaries, coaches, bus drivers, etc.) who administer medication must receive
training before being authorized to do so.
Based upon the documentation of training and competency in the administration
of medication, the school nurse will communicate to the Superintendent/designee
pertaining to authorization of unlicensed persons to administer
medication. Training that shall be acceptable for the purpose of authorization of
unlicensed personnel is addressed under the section of this policy titled “Required
Training of Unlicensed Personnel to Administer Medication.”
H. Administration of Medication During Off-Campus Field Trips and School-
Sponsored Events
The school will accommodate students requiring administration of medication
during field trips or school-sponsored events as follows:
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 4 of 8

NEPN/NSBA Code: JLCD
The school nurse, principal, and, as appropriate, the school unit’s Section 504
Coordinator and/or IEP, will determine whether an individual student’s
participation is contraindicated due to the unstable/fragile nature of his/her health
condition, the distance from emergency care that may be required, and/or other
extraordinary circumstances. The student’s parent and primary care provider will
be consulted in making this determination. The decision will be made in
compliance with applicable laws, including the IDEA, § 504 and the Americans
with Disabilities Act (ADA).
The parent must provide the appropriate number of doses needed for the duration
of the field trip or school-sponsored event.
When there are no contraindications to student participation, an appropriately
trained staff member will be assigned to administer medication. The parent will
be encouraged to accompany the student, if possible, to care for the student and
administer medication.
All provisions of this policy shall apply to medications to be administered during
off-campus field trips and school-sponsored events. As practicable, the DOE’s
“Procedure for Medication Administration on School Field Trips” will be
followed.
I. Student Self-Administration of Emergency Medications for Asthma, Anaphylaxis
and Diabetes.
Students with these emergency conditions may be authorized by the building
principal, in consultation with the school nurse, to possess and self-administer
emergency medication during the school day, field trips, school-sponsored events,
or while on a school bus. This authorization will be granted if the following
conditions have been met.
1. The parent (or student, if 18 years of age or older) provides a written
request for the student to possess and self-administer emergency
medication.
2. The student must have the prior written approval from his/her primary
health care provider. The written notice from the student’s primary care
provider must specify the name and dosage of the medication, frequency
with which it may be administered, and the circumstances that may
warrant its use.
3. The student’s parent/guardian must submit written verification to the
school from the student’s primary care health provider confirming that the
student has the knowledge and the skills to safely possess and use an
epinephrine auto-injector or asthma inhaler.
4. The school nurse shall evaluate the student’s technique to ensure proper
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 5 of 8

NEPN/NSBA Code: JLCD
and effective use of an epinephrine auto-injector or asthma inhaler taking
into account the maturity and capability of the student and the
circumstances under which the student will or may have to self-administer
the medication.
5. The parent will be informed that the school cannot accurately monitor
the frequency and appropriateness of use when the student self-
administers medication, and that the school unit will not be responsible for
any injury arising from the student’s self-medication.
Authorization granted to a student to possess and self-administer Emergency
Medication for Asthma, Anaphylaxis and Diabetes shall be valid for the current
school year only and must be renewed annually.
A student’s authorization to possess and self-administer these medications may be
limited or revoked by the building principal after consultation with the school
nurse and the student’s parents if the student demonstrates inability to responsibly
possess and self-administer such medication.
To the extent legally permissible, staff members may be provided with such
information regarding the student’s medication and the student’s self-
administration as may be in the best interest of the student.
Sharing, borrowing, or distribution of medication is prohibited. The student’s
authorization to self-administer medication may be revoked and the student may
be subject to disciplinary consequences for violation of this policy.
J. Administration of Over-the-Counter Medications
With prior written parent permission, students may receive certain over the
counter medications at school, e.g., Tylenol, Ibuprofen, Tums, cough drops, etc.
pursuant to a standing order from the school physician/school health advisor.
K. Required Training of Unlicensed Personnel to Administer Medication
Unlicensed school personnel who administer medication to students in a school
setting (at school, on school transportation to or from school, on field trips, or
during school-sponsored events) must be trained in the administration of
medication before being authorized to carry out this responsibility. Such training
must be provided by a registered professional nurse or physician and include the
components specified in Department of Education Rules Chapter 40 and other
applicable Department of Education standards, recommendations, programs,
and/or methodologies.
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 6 of 8

NEPN/NSBA Code: JLCD
The trainer shall document the training and competency of unlicensed school
personnel to administer medication. Based upon a review of the documentation
of training and competency in the administration of medication, the school nurse
will communicate recommendations to the Superintendent/designee pertaining to
authorization of such unlicensed personnel pertaining to authorization to
administer medication.
Following the initial training, a training review and information update must be
held at least annually for those unlicensed school personnel authorized to
administer medication.
L. Delegation and Implementation
The Superintendent/designee shall be responsible for developing administrative
procedures and/or protocols to implement or supplement this policy.
Such procedures/protocols shall include direction regarding:
1. Safe transport of medication to and from school;
2. Administration of medication during field trips and school-sponsored
events;
3. Accountability for medications, particularly those regulated by
Schedule II of the Controlled Substances Act;
4. Proper storage of medication at school;
5. Training of appropriate staff on administration of emergency
medications including the standards for the signs and symptoms of
anaphylaxis and the use of epinephrine auto-injectors for students with
known anaphylaxis allergies.
6.The procedure to follow in the event of a medication reaction;
7. Access to medications in case of a disaster;
8. The process for documenting medications given and medication errors;
and
9. The proper disposal of medications not retrieved by parents.
Legal Reference: 20-A M.R.S.A. §§ 254(5); 4009(4); 4502 (5)(N); 6305
Me. Dept. of Ed. Rule Ch. 40 (2016)
21 USC §801 et.seq. (Controlled Substances Act)
28 C.F.R. Part 35 (Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990)
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 7 of 8

NEPN/NSBA Code: JLCD
34 C.F.R. Part 104 (Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973)
34 C.F.R. Part 300 (Individuals with Disabilities Education Act)
Cross Reference: JLCD-E – Medication Administration on School Field Trips
(Me. DOE)
JLCDA – Medical Marijuana in Schools
Adopted: July 8, 2009
Revised: December 8, 2010
Revised: May 24, 2017
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 8 of 8