SOURCE: https://www.rsu5.org/fs/resource-manager/view/11094b28-5a80-47c3-95de-2a5a419e4fa0
SECTION: /facultystaff/jobdescriptions
TITLE: 403b Annual Retirement Benefits Guide
TYPE: Finalsite-PDF
============================================================

Regional School Unit #5, ME

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction
3
Eligibility & Enrollment
4
403(b) Account
5
Notes
6
Notes
7
Maximum Allowable Contribution Limits (MAC)
8
Investment Products
9
Investment Fees
10
Transactions
11
Transaction Procedures
14
Helpful Websites
16
Frequently Asked Questions
17
Page 1

This handbook is produced by U.S. OMNI & TSACG Compliance Services (OMNI/TSACG) and is intended to explain the
benefits and provisions of the retirement savings plan maintained by your employer only. It is not intended to describe
or cover any state sponsored retirement plans or other benefits available to you through your employer. This guide is
not intended to be a substitute for qualified counsel. OMNI/TSACG is not engaged in rendering legal, accounting or tax
advice.
Copyright© 2026
U.S. OMNI & TSACG Compliance Services
73 Eglin Parkway NE, Suite 202, Fort Walton Beach, FL 32548
https://www.tsacg.com

INTRODUCTION
Navigating the financial road to retirement can be a bumpy ride
if you're not prepared for potential hazards.
These can include:
Longer life expectancy,
Increase in cost of living,
Unexpected healthcare expenses, and
The uncertain future of social security.
Although you may have a pension plan, that might not be
enough to sustain you through retirement. Even with social
Security, your income has less purchasing power today than it
did even a few years ago.
The latest Bureau of Labor Statistics data shows that households
led by those 65 and older spent an average of $60,087 in 2023 -
a 3.9% increase from the previous year. These expenses include:
Housing Transportation Healthcare Food Utilities Other
$21,455 $9,033 $8,027 $7,7141 $4,307 $9,551
(36%) (15%) (14%) (13%) (7%) (15%)
This figure represents an average of expenses, though individual retirement costs may vary significantly.
Establishing goals and understanding available options can help with planning for increased and/or
unexpected expenses down the road.
To support your journey towards retirement, your employer offers a voluntary, tax-sheltered retirement
plan(s) that can help build additional retirement savings to supplement your pension and bridge any
potential income gaps.
U.S. OMNI & TSACG Compliance Services (OMNI/TSACG) serves as Administrator of your employer's
voluntary retirement plan(s). This book provides a road map of your employer's available plan(s) and key
information to help you make informed decisions regarding retirement planning.
https://www.tsacg.com/
Visit our website for more information including:
Employer specific Web Page - Find your employer's authorized
investment providers and related Plan information.
Financial Wellness Center - Explore articles and videos on retirement
and financial planning, and use budgeting calculators to estimate your
retirement needs.
Page 3

ELIGIBILITY & ENROLLMENT
Eligibility Most employees are eligible to participate in the 403(b) plan immediately upon
employment; however, private contractors, appointed/elected trustees and/or
school board members are not eligible to participate in the 403(b) plan. Verify if
your employer allows student workers to participate in the plan. Eligible employees
may make voluntary elective deferrals to the 403(b) plan and are fully vested in their
contributions and earnings at all times.
Once you are ready to participate in your employer's 403(b) plan, you should:
Enrollment
Research the authorized Investment Provider(s) and Product(s) available to you.
You may only choose from Providers that are authorized under your employer’s
plan. A current list of your authorized Investment Providers is located at:
https://www.tsacg.com/individual/plan-sponsor.
Contact an Investment Provider Representative (if applicable) to open an
account.
Choose an investment product(s) that is suitable to help you meet your
retirement goals.
Complete a Salary Reduction Agreement (SRA) form. This form authorizes your
employer to withhold contributions from your pay and send the funds to your
selected Investment Provider on your behalf. The SRA form is necessary to:
Begin or modify contributions,
Change allocations, or
End payroll contributions.
SRA forms are available for download or printing at:
https://www.tsacg.com/individual/plan-sponsor.
Submitting an SRA form does not open an account with the selected Investment
Provider. You must open an account prior to submitting an SRA form.
Contribution The total annual amount of your contributions must not exceed the Maximum
Limit Allowable Contribution (MAC) calculation. The Internal Revenue Service regulations
limit the amount participants may contribute to tax-advantaged retirement plans
annually. For your convenience, the 2026 MAC limits are printed within this guide
and a MAC calculator is available online at:
https://www.tsacg.com/calculations/mac-calculator.
Page 4

403(b) ACCOUNT
Features 1) Contributions Deposited into Individual Accounts - You own your account
and make all decisions concerning the amount of your retirement savings
contributions.
2) Convenience of Payroll Contributions - Your employer sends each of your
contributions to your selected provider company for deposit.
3) High Annual Contribution Limits - For 2026, employees can contribute up to
$24,500 to their 403(b) account. Some employees may qualify for other
additional amounts. Information concerning these additional amounts is
provided within this Guide.
4) Flexible Contributions - You may change the amount of your contribution
during the year as allowed by your employer.
5) Benefits Paid to Your Beneficiary at Death - All funds in your account are
payable to your beneficiary upon your death.
The decision to participate in a 403(b) plan should reflect your future financial needs. It is important to note
that 403(b) accounts are designed for long-term accumulation. You should consult with your financial
advisor or tax consultant to determine the potential advantages of traditional 403(b) accounts.
Benefits Traditional 403(b) Account
Contributions are pre-tax reductions from your paycheck.
Your income tax is reduced for every payroll contribution you make.
Any earnings on your deposits are tax-deferred until withdrawn, usually
during retirement.
All withdrawals from a traditional 403(b) account are taxed during the year
of the withdrawal at your income tax rate applicable for that year.
Note: It is recommended to consult with a financial advisor to determine the best approach based on your
specific situation, including your retirement goals.
Page 5

NOTES
Page 6

NOTES
Page 7

Maximum Allowable
Contribution Limits
Contributing to your personal retirement account is an important part of your total financial plan. The IRS
limits the amount participants may contribute to tax-advantaged retirement plans annually and imposes
substantial penalties for violating contribution limits. The maximum allowable contribution or "MAC"
calculator shows you what you are allowed to contribute toward your retirement plan(s) this calendar year.
All participants should generally receive regular information from their advisor about scheduling the level
of their contributions each year. This is especially true if you are eligible to use the "Service-Based
Catch-Up" (years of service must be verifiable by your current employer) or an "Age or Super Age-Based
Catch-Up" election. The following information is designed to help you and your representative determine
your MAC limit for this year.
403(b) Maximum Allowable Contribution Limits
It is advised to seek a professional financial advisor for MAC limit determination
403(b) 2026 The basic limit is 100% of your includable compensation up to $24,500.
Basic Limit
The following "Catch-Up" provision requires certification by OMNI/TSACG
403(b) Service-Based Under IRC Section 402(g), if you have been employed by the employer for more
Catch-Up Limit than fifteen (15) years and your contributions to all 403(b) (traditional and
non-traditional) plans have not averaged over $5,000 per year. You may be able
to contribute an additional $3,000 per year. The total aggregated amount of this
provision over your career is $15,000. This total is calculated by adding together
the total contributions made for all years.
403(b) Age & Participants who are age 50 to 59 or 64 or older by 12/31/2026 qualify to make
Super Age-Based an additional contribution of up to $8,000 to their 403(b) account.
Catch-Up Limit Participants who are aged 60, 61, 62, or 63 on 12/31/2026 may contribute an
additional amount of up to $11,250 to their 403(b) account.
Note: Individuals whose prior-year social security wages were $150,000 and above
must contribute this amount to a Roth plan.
A MAC calculator is available online to help determine your total MAC limit for the year at:
https://www.tsacg.com/calculations/mac-calculator
Contribution Accounting Formula
1. Calendar year contributions are first applied toward the participant's Basic Annual Limit for that year.
2. Calendar year contributions that exceed the Basic Annual Limit are applied towards any eligible
"Service-Based Catch-Up" limit.
3. Calendar year contributions that exceed the Basic Annual Limit plus the "Service-Based" limit are
applied towards any eligible "Age or Super Age-Based Catch-Up" limit.
Maximum allowable contribution limits should be reviewed each year to ensure that all contributions
remain within IRS Guidelines. Participants should retain this calculation during the year.
Note: Employees who maintain and contribute to both a 401(k) and 403(b) account during the same calendar
year are subject to a combined maximum limit on contributions even if the plans are maintained by separate
employers.
Page 8

INVESTMENT PRODUCTS
There are several types of investment products for tax-advantaged retirement savings. For some
employees, the assistance of an investment advisor can be very helpful in understanding how a particular
investment product (or combination of investment products) may help you reach your future financial goals
and suggest a financial plan suitable to your risk tolerance. The three main types of investment products
that may be available through your employer are explained below. Make sure that the investment product
you choose fits your timeframe, risk tolerance and financial needs.
Fixed/Variable Fixed annuities provide for safety of principal and a current interest
crediting rate. Variable annuities usually offer both a fixed interest
Annuities
account along with separate accounts that are invested in bond and/or
equity markets.
Service Based Service Based Mutual Funds are offered by investment management
Mutual Funds companies and brokerage firms. Participants may direct their
contributions to various investment portfolios, which are professionally
managed by fund managers. Investment portfolios can include funds
from a single fund family or consist of a platform that spans several fund
families on a single statement. These mutual funds can include fees to
pay investment advisors to assist you with your investment choices
and/or financial planning.
Self-directed Mutual Funds are investments that apply no sales fee to the
No-load
market-based mutual funds offered, though ongoing investment
Low Fee
management fees are charged to the funds selected. These funds are for
Mutual Funds individuals who do not wish to utilize the services of a local investment
advisor. Participants direct the investments among the choices provided
by the fund company with these investment products. You can contact
the company by calling a toll-free phone number and/or online access.
It is important to understand the investment product prior to investing. A prospectus or other specific
material will list the investment’s objective along with any associated fees and charges.
Employer policy and administrative requirements allow Investment Providers who meet certain standards
and qualifications to provide retirement accounts to employees. The Investment Providers listed on your
employer's authorized Investment Provider page at: https://www.tsacg.com/individual/plan-sponsor/ qualify
under the guidelines established by your employer. This list does not reflect any opinion as to the financial
strength or quality of product or service for any Investment Provider. Please be aware that this authorized
Investment Provider list could change during the year, so please check your employer's specific page at:
https://www.tsacg.com/individual/plan-sponsor/ regularly for updates.
Page 9

INVESTMENT FEES
When choosing an investment product it is important to know how fees associated with your product can
affect your return.
Identify the fees, sales charges or administrative expenses associated with the account. Investment
providers are required to disclose any fees associated with an investment product (Disclosure of Fees). This
information may be included in an annuity contract, custodial agreement and/or a Prospectus. So, it is
important to read these documents and ask your investment provider to explain each fee that is associated
with your account.
Below are a few of the types of fees that are commonly charged. Investment costs, or fees, are usually
deducted from the funds in your account.
Annuity Contract Fee - Usually applies to certain variable annuity products and may be a fixed
annual fee. This fee may not apply once your account reaches a certain accumulation balance.
Custodial Fee - Charged each year by the custodian for holding mutual funds in your account.
Expense Fee - Charges for investment management, administration, and distribution services
associated with investment management of each mutual fund.
Mortality and Expense Fee (M&E) – Applicable to variable annuities and expressed as a
percentage of assets charged each year.
Wrap Fee - May be added to mutual fund accounts to pay for advisor services.
Transfer Fee - An amount charged for transferring your funds within a mutual fund family or to
another fund.
Questions How are the fees and expense charges applied?
Find out if they are charged to each contribution or to the account balance, etc.
to Consider
Asking
Are surrender charges applicable to each payment or to the total account
balance? How long does the surrender charge apply? Are surrender charges level,
rolling or declining?
Withdrawal or Surrender Fee – Usually charged during the first few years after creation
of your account or after each deposit and applicable only if you withdraw funds or
exchange/transfer funds from your account.
What is the minimum interest rate and current rate of return for interest bearing
accounts?
Rates will vary for different investment products, so ask your investment provider for
further information.
What is the historical rate of return for interest bearing accounts, sub-accounts
or funds?
Last twelve months and annual average for the last three, five and ten years, if
applicable.
Be advised that the fees listed above are not intended to be a complete list of possible fees. Further, there
are no investment products that are completely “fee-free” due to the fact that all investment products must
be manufactured, managed, and administered by some entity.
Page 10

TRANSACTIONS
Distributions
The Internal Revenue Service regulations restrict 403(b) plan distributions.
403(b) Permitted
Distributions
Generally, distributions cannot be made from a 403(b) account until you:
Reach age 59½;
Have a severance from employment;
Are deceased;
Become disabled;
Encounter a specific financial hardship; or
Have a qualified reservist distribution.
In addition to the information provided in this section, the IRS makes available at www.irs.gov several
publications which speak to retirement plan transactions and taxation. These publications include the
following:
571 - Tax Sheltered Annuity Plans (403(b) Plans) For Public School Employees and Certain
Tax-Exempt Organizations;
575 - Pension and Annuity Income.
Required Minimum
Distributions
Distributions from a 403(b) account must begin by April 1 the following calendar year in which you:
Reach age 73, or
Retire (if your plan allows you to delay taking your RMD until retirement).
Distributions will be subject to normal income tax during the year in which they are received.
Taxes
A distribution from a traditional 403(b) account is generally taxed as ordinary income in the year it is issued.
There are specific federal tax-withholding rules that apply to all distributions from retirement savings and
investment plans. The taxes on plan distributions can be complex. For these reasons, if you are considering
a distribution from your account, you are encouraged to seek professional tax advice. If you choose to take
a distribution, you are responsible for satisfying the distribution rules and for any tax consequences.
Distributions to participants are reported annually by the provider on IRS Form 1099R.
NOTE: Some provisions above may not be available under your employer's plan and/or your investment contract.
Page 11

TRANSACTIONS
Rollover Participants may move funds from one qualified plan account, i.e. 403(b)
account, 401(k) account or an IRA, to another qualified plan account at age
59½ or when separated from service. Rollovers do not create a taxable event.
Participants may exchange retirement account balances from one 403(b)
Exchange
investment provider to another 403(b) investment provider that is authorized
under the plan; however, there may be limitations affecting exchanges, and
participants should be aware of any charges or penalties that may exist in
individual investment contracts prior to exchange.
Qualified A Qualified Domestic Relation Order (QDRO) is a legal judgment, decree or
Domestic court order that provides an "alternate payee," such as a participant's spouse,
former spouse, child, or dependent with all or a portion of the participant's
Relation Order
retirement account balance.
Depending on the provisions of your 403(b) account contract and the
Loan
provisions of the employer's plan, you may be eligible to take a loan from
your 403(b) account.
If available, general-purpose loans are generally granted for a term of five
years or less, and loans taken to purchase a principal residence may be
longer than five years.
Details and terms of a loan are established by the provider and/or the plan.
Participants must repay loans through regular payments as directed by the
provider and/or the plan. Loans are generally not permissible to participants
who have an outstanding defaulted loan in any retirement plan maintained
by the employer.
Depending on the provisions of your 403(b) account contract and the
Other
provisions of te employer's plan, you may be eligible to take a loan from your
Transactions 403(b) account.
Birth and/or Adoptions
Emergency Expenses
Domestic Abuse
Qualified Disaster Recovery
Note: Some provisions above may not be available under your employer's plan and/or your investment contract.
Page 12

TRANSACTIONS
Plan-to-Plan Transfer
Plan-to-plan means that the participant is moving his or her 403(b) account from one employer's plan
retaining the same account with the authorized investment provider under a new employer's plan.
Service Credit
If allowable by your state retirement system and if you are eligible, you may be able to use your retirement
account balances to purchase service credits for state retirement. Contact your state retirement system for
additional information.
Hardship Withdrawals (403(b) plans)
You may be able to take a hardship withdrawal in the event of an immediate and specific heavy financial
need, if the distribution is for:
Medical expenses (including the past 6 months) for the employee, spouse, dependents or a
primary beneficiary. Expenses must not be covered by insurance. If the participant is not the
recipient of the medical care, documentation showing the relationship must be provided.
Costs related to purchase of a principal residence (excluding mortgage payments). A purchase
contract must be no more than 30 days old.
Tuition and related educational fees as well as room and board expenses for the next 12
months of post-secondary education for the employee, spouse, dependents, or primary
beneficiary.
Payments necessary to prevent eviction from, or to avoid foreclosure on a principal residence.
The notice cannot be more than 90 days old, and the payment must be at least 1 month
behind.
Burial or funeral expenses for employee's parent, spouse, child, dependents (as defined in IRC
152) or primary beneficiary. The expenses must be no more than 90 days old.
Expenses for the repair of damage to a principal residence that would qualify for the casualty
deduction under section 165. The contractors estimate must be no more than 90 days old.
Expenses and losses (including loss of income) incurred by the employee on account of a
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) declared disaster, provided that their
principal residence or place of employment at the time of the disaster was located in an area
designated by FEMA for individual assistance with respect to the disaster.
NOTE: Some provisions above may not be available under your employer's plan and/or your investment contract.
Page 13

TRANSACTION PROCEDURES
Online Distribution System
The Online Distribution System (ODS) is the fastest and easiest way for authorization of a distribution from
your account. This online resource is accessible to all participants and employers through OMNI/TSACG's
Online Distribution System website located at: https://transaction.tsacg.com.
Transactions
(May Include)
• Loans
• Transfers/exchanges,
• Rollovers,
• Hardship withdrawals,
• QDROS, or
• Cash distributions
By using ODS, approval certificates for allowable transactions may be
provided immediately for submission to your Investment Provider.
Transactions such as QDRO's, which require additional documentation and
information, can be initiated online for expedited completion. Only
transactions allowed by your employer's plan can be processed. Transactions
can be submitted 24 hours a day, 7 days a week for your convenience.
Manual Form
Submission
For those who would prefer to submit a transaction via fax or mail,
OMNI/TSACG has the necessary forms available online to complete a plan
transaction. These forms can be accessed on the OMNI/TSACG website at:
https://www.tsacg.com.
For manual transactions that require the original signature, please mail to
the following address:
U.S. OMNI & TSACG Compliance Services
Attn: Participant Transaction Dept.
P.O. Box 4037
Fort Walton Beach, FL 32549
Fax: 866.741.0645
Carefully reviewing all documentation, verifying that you have signed all
necessary forms, and verifying that you have included any necessary
evidence will help OMNI/TSACG avoid delays that are caused by incomplete
documentation.
For assistance with transactions, please call 1-888-796-3786 - option 4.
Page 14

TRANSACTION PROCEDURES
For those opting not to utilize the Online Distribution System, forms may be required to accompany your
investment provider's paperwork for submittal to OMNI/TSACG. Disclosure forms can be downloaded from
https://www.tsacg.com/forms/.
TRANSACTION REQUESTED FORMS NEEDED FOR PROCESSING
Contract Exchanges, Rollovers Submit complete Investment Provider paperwork for transaction.
- incoming and outgoing Original forms may be required by the Investment Provider.
Transfers Submit complete Investment Provider paperwork for transaction.
Original forms may be required by the Investment Provider.
Transfer - Purchase of Submit complete Investment Provider paperwork for transaction and
Service Credit the following:
• Completed State Retirement System Documents
403(b)Cash Submit complete Investment Provider paperwork for transaction.
Withdrawals Original forms may be required by the Investment Provider.
(with qualifying event only:
age 59½ or separation
from service)
403(b) Loans Submit complete Investment Provider paperwork for transaction.
Original forms may be required by the Investment Provider.
Special Loans: Submit complete Investment Provider paperwork for transaction and
• Birth and/or Adoptions the following:
• Emergency Expenses • Completed Distribution and Loan Certification Statement
• Domestic Abuse Please note: Evidence of expenses MAY be required for approval of
• Qualified Disaster Recovery request
Hardship Submit complete Investment Provider paperwork for transaction and
Withdrawals the following:
(403(b) Plans) • Completed Hardship Withdrawal Disclosure form
• Hardships due to expenses for repairs to a principal residence
require a completed Distribution & Loan Certification Statement.
Please note: Evidence of expenses MAY be required for approval of
request
NOTE:
Some of the provisions listed may not be available
under your employer's plan and/or your investment contract.
Page 15

HELPFUL WEBSITES
Site links are provided for access to additional information
concerning your retirement options
U.S. OMNI & TSACG https://www.tsacg.com
Compliance Services Obtain employer specific forms, the most up-to-date list of
authorized investment providers, benefit information, and more.
A.M. Best Company https://web.ambest.com
A good source of information on company ratings, products, and
news.
Administration on Aging https://acl.gov
Pertinent information on retirement, Medicare, and other concerns
for retirees.
American Savings https://www.asec.org
Education Council Valuable information about financial security.
Employee Benefit https://www.ebri.org
Research Institute Provides information on employee benefit programs.
Employee Benefits https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ebsa
Security Administration Information on pensions, COBRA, Plan Sponsors, Compliance, Fraud
and more.
Internal Revenue Service https://www.irs.gov
Your #1 source for tax information including changes to the tax
code.
Morningstar https://www.morningstar.com
Follow information on stocks, funds, and factors affecting the stock
market.
Social Security Administration https://www.ssa.gov
Find answers to all your questions concerning Social Security.
Standard and Poors Company https://www.spglobal.com
A good source of information on company ratings, fund information,
indices, and more.
As a public service employee, you may be a member of your state retirement plan. Your state's retirement
plan links may be found at: https://www.tsa.com/related-links/retirement-system-links/. Your state
retirement system is not associated with your supplemental retirement account or OMNI/TSACG.
OMNI/TSACG does not offer investment advice, sell or market any investment/insurance products.
Page 16

FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS
What is “the plan”?
The plan encompasses the provisions of a 403(b) arrangement whereby employees may
contribute and accumulate savings on a tax favored basis through their paycheck. The
provisions of the plan are defined by a plan document that is adopted by the Plan Sponsor,
or employer, and qualifies under Internal Revenue Service (IRS) guidelines. These provisions
are outlined in this Guide to assist you in understanding how to better utilize this important
employee benefit. The plan also lists the Investment Providers that your employer has
authorized to provide 403(b) accounts.
What are account accumulations?
Account accumulations are the funds, plus any earnings, in your retirement account(s) that
have grown as you continually contribute to your account.
Who is a participant?
If you decide to contribute to a personal retirement plan, you become a participant of that
plan.
What is a Plan Sponsor?
The entity (generally your employer) that established and maintains the retirement plan is
considered the Plan Sponsor.
What is an Investment Provider?
In this Guide, an Investment Provider refers to companies that are authorized in your
employer's plan to offer you retirement products such as mutual funds and/or annuities.
What is a Plan Administrator?
A Plan Administrator is responsible for processing your transactions, maintaining records,
and keeping your employer's plan in compliance with IRS Regulations. Your employer's Plan
Administrator is OMNI/TSACG.
Why are transaction requests submitted to the Plan Administrator?
IRS regulations require that the Plan Sponsor review all transaction requests to ensure that
they are permitted by the provisions of the plan. On behalf of your Plan Sponsor,
OMNI/TSACG's professionally trained staff reviews these transactions to ensure they are
compliant with regard to both plan provisions and IRS regulations.
What is a MAC?
Your Maximum Allowable Contribution (MAC) is the total amount you are allowed to
contribute to your retirement account each year. This amount is based on IRS regulations
and the provisions of your employer's plan. Additional information about the MAC limits are
explained on the MAC page within this Guide.
What is the difference between an exchange and a rollover?
An exchange is the movement of your account from one Investment Provider to another
Investment Provider in the plan while employed. A rollover is the movement of your
account out of the plan to another retirement plan or account at separation of service or
attainment of age 59½.
Page 17