SOURCE: https://www.rsu5.org/fs/resource-manager/view/163047c2-31da-43ff-a23a-dd9547bf730d
SECTION: /facultystaff/jobdescriptions
TITLE: RSU No. 5 Local Credentialing Plan
TYPE: Finalsite-PDF
============================================================

RSU No. 5
Local Credentialing Committee
Handbook
Approved by the RSU No. 5 Board of Directors:
April 10, 2019

RSU No. 5: Local Credentialing Plan
I. This plan will be in effect beginning July 1, 2019.
II. Scope of the Local Credentialing Committee (LCC) Support System: The support
system will be for the schools that comprise RSU No. 5: Durham Community School,
Morse Street School, Mast Landing School, Freeport Middle School, Freeport High
School and Pownal Elementary School.
III. Efficient Management, Structure and Responsibilities: The RSU No. 5 LCC will
function as the governance body of the support system. The LCC will be composed of
the following teacher representative(s) from each building in the RSU. These
representatives will serve for a period of one year. The term of office will be from the
second Friday in May of the year of the election to the second Friday in May of the
following year.
A. Durham Community School 1 Representative
B. Morse Street School 1 Representative
C. Mast Landing School 1 Representative
D. Freeport Middle School 1 Representative
E. Freeport High School 2 Representatives
F. Pownal Elementary School .5 Representative
In future years, any adjustments to the number of representatives above would need to
be requested through the Stipend Committee first and then approved through the budget
process.
The educator representatives of the LCC will be elected yearly by the teaching staffs at
each of the schools. In order to be considered for membership on the LCC, a person
must have completed at least one professional certificate renewal cycle and have at
least three years of experience in RSU No. 5. People interested in serving on the
committee will submit their names to their building administrator by the 15th of April. All
names submitted at each school will be placed on the school’s ballot. A vote will be
taken by the second Friday in May. Votes will be tallied by the Principal and the top
name from each school in the RSU will be submitted to the Superintendent. In the event
of a tie vote, a runoff election will be held. If a vacancy occurs during the school year, an
election will be held to fill the vacancy. Committee members finishing their terms will
remain as non-voting members of the committee through the month of June in order to
provide a smooth transition.
The Superintendent will appoint one administrator from the RSU to the LCC.
The LCC may not include school board members from RSU No. 5.
2

Election of Officers- At the June meeting, the newly elected members of the committee
will elect the Chairperson of the LCC and a Communication/Recording Secretary.
Chairperson of the LCC- prepares the agenda, conducts the meeting, signs all
necessary documents and acts as the liaison between the Local Credentialing
Committee, Mentor Chair, Maine Department of Education (MDOE) Certification
Office, and the Superintendent/designee of RSU No. 5.
Communication/Recording Secretary- keeps minutes of all meetings; sends
out communications as directed by the Chairperson.
Building Representative- maintains and secures staff files at individual schools.
Meetings - The full Local Credentialing Committee will meet monthly on a day and time
decided by the committee.
Roles and Responsibilities: The Local Credentialing Committee is responsible for
approving educator Professional Growth Plans prior to implementation and verifying
completion of the approved plan. The LCC Chairperson will provide the Commissioner of
the Maine Department of Education with certification recommendations.
Representatives:
● Must have completed at least one five year professional certificate
renewal cycle,
● Must have at least three years of teaching experience in RSU No. 5.,
● Must attend all monthly meetings of the LCC, and
● Must be timely with bringing forth educator files.
IV. Recommendation to the Commissioner- The final recommendation of the Certification
Committee regarding a teacher’s eligibility for certification shall be submitted to the
Department of Education in the format required by Department of Education Certification
rules Chapter 115. This document is available from the Local Credentialing Committee.
Certification recommendations will be made within the online certification system once
the LCC has verified completion of renewal requirements. If the educator has not met the
requirements for renewal of certification, the LCC will notify the State, and the
Superintendent/designee that the teacher is not recommended for renewal. Once the
educator has been recommended for renewal, it is the educator’s responsibility to
complete the online requirements and make the recertification fee payment. After
certification has been approved, the educator must provide a copy of their certification to
the Human Resources Coordinator and their building LCC representative.
3

V. LCC Communication: Members of the LCC will be responsible for communicating
certification information to and from their building/constituency.
Records regarding the entire certification process will be kept in the certification file at
each school. These records are available to members of the LCC, the candidate, and the
Superintendent of Schools.
VI. Mentors (Refer to the Peer Mentor and Support Handbook for more information.)
Mentors will be matched to all educators who are new to the district. The
Superintendent/designee will request that the Mentor Chair present a list of potential
mentors to him/her prior to August 1st for appointment as a mentor.
Mentors will be nominated to the Board of Directors by the Superintendent from among
the pool of educators who are mentor trained and who express a desire to serve.
The Mentor Chair and administrators will thoughtfully match mentors with mentees by
taking into account building location, subject area and grade level as much as possible.
If the administrator is unable to find a qualified mentor, the administrator will notify the
Mentor Chair who will work with the Superintendent/designee to identify a mentor.
Mentor responsibilities are outlined in the RSU No. 5 Peer Mentor and Support
Handbook.
To be eligible to mentor, teachers must:
A. Hold a Maine professional teaching certificate,
B. Have a summative evaluation score of effective or higher,
C. Have at least three years of teaching experience in RSU No. 5,
D. Employ sound educational practice in the classroom,
E. Be committed to collaborative practices, and
F. Be a skillful communicator able to adapt to different communication styles.
VII. Professional Renewal Plans
Professional and conditionally certified educators will develop a Professional Growth
Plan for their professional certification. This plan should be built around their goals that
are aligned to the Marshall Rubrics. Educators are ineligible to count hours toward
their professional certification until they have an LCC approved professional
growth plan.
This requirement is waived for the following hours.
● Hours earned through training and professional development that you are either
invited to or required to attend by RSU5.
● Hours earned through an accredited college or university in the field of education.
4

● Hours earned through an accredited college or university in a field directly
applicable to the area the teacher teaches.
● Hours for conditional certificates as outlined in your letter from the MDOE
Certification Department.
Educators should have an active PGP in place at all times or be actively working with their LCC
representative to write a plan.
In the plan, the teacher describes what activities s/he will undertake to renew certification.
Candidates must submit evidence of 90 hours of professional growth credits aligned with their
Professional Growth Plan developed using the Marshall Rubrics to the LCC no later than May
1st of the year they renew their certificate. See the Professional Growth Credits section of the
RSU No. 5 certification plan for examples of activities for professional growth.
VIII. End of Year LCC Reflection- An annual reflection of the Support System process will
be made at the end of the year. At the September meeting, this reflection will be used by
the LCC to make recommendations for program improvement or revision.
All Professional Growth Plans must have prior approval by the LCC with the exceptions
noted in section VII above.
Educators must have 90 hours aligned with their Professional Growth goals. Stipend positions
are not eligible for certification hours.
EXAMPLES of Possible Activities
● 1 college credit = 15 hours
● 1 recertification credit (C.E.U.) =10 hours
● 1 hour in-service training/seminars = 1 hour
● 15 hours of independent study approved by building administrator = 15
hours with a limit of 15 hours per certification cycle
● 8 weeks supervising a student intern = 15 hours with a limit of 30 total
hours per certification cycle.
This plan was written by a subcommittee of the current certification committee with the
committee’s endorsement. This plan was reviewed by Emily Gribben, Educator Effectiveness
Coordinator from MDOE, at a meeting with the subcommittee on January 14, 2019 for feedback.
Small revisions were made and brought back to the full Certification Committee for review on
February 7, 2019.
The plan was revised and approved by the LCC on 9.6.24.
5

6