SOURCE: https://www.rsu5.org/fs/resource-manager/view/587852ae-c288-4538-9aeb-726550af6c3a
SECTION: /facultystaff/jobdescriptions
TITLE: Principal's Professional Growth and Evaluation Handbook
TYPE: Finalsite-PDF
============================================================

RSU5
Durham – Freeport – Pownal
Growth & Evaluation
Principal Evaluation
Handbook
Revised: 2017-2018
Board Approved: June 13, 2018
Board Approved: May 26, 2021

Table of Contents
Introduction
Evaluation Timeline/Workflow
The Model
Professional PracticeRubrics: 6 Domains
Self-Reflection
PeerReview
Surveys
Summative Evaluation Worksheet Page
1

Introduction: Based on Kim Marshall Principal Evaluation
Rubrics
1. These rubrics are organized around six domainscovering all aspects of an administrator’s job performance:
I. Diagnosis and Planning
II. Priority Management and Communication
III. Curriculum and Data
IV. Supervision, Evaluation, and Professional Development
V. Discipline and Parent Involvement
VI. Management and External Relations
The rubrics use a four-level rating scale with thefollowing labels:
4 – Highly Effective
3 – Effective
2 – Improvement Necessary
1 – Does Not Meet Standards
2. The rubrics are designed to give principals andother school-based administrators an end-of-the-yearassessment of
where they stand in all performance areas – and detailedguidance for improvement. These rubrics are not checklistsfor
school visits. To knowledgeably fill out the rubrics,a supervisor needs to have been in the school frequentlythroughout
the year; it is irresponsible to fill out the rubricsbased on one visit and without ongoing dialogue.
3. TheEffectivelevel describes solid, expected professionalperformance; any administrator should be pleasedwith
scores at this level. TheHighly Effectivelevel isreserved for truly outstanding leadership as describedby very
demanding criteria; there will be relatively few scoresat this level.Improvement Necessaryindicates thatperformance
has real deficiencies and must improve (although somenovice administrators might start here). And performance at the
Does Not Meet Standardslevel is clearly unacceptableand will lead to dismissal if it is not improvedimmediately.
4. To score, read across the four levels of performancefor each criterion, find the level that best describesthe
principal’s performance, and circle or highlight it.On each page, this will create a clear graphic displayof overall
performance, areas for commendation, and areas thatneed work. Write the overall score at the bottomof each page
with brief comments, and then record all the scoresand overall comments on the summary page.
5. Evaluation conferences are greatly enhanced ifthe supervisor and administrator fill out the rubricsin advance and
then meet and compare one page at a time. Of course,the supervisor has the final say, but the discussionshould aim for
consensus based on actual evidence of the most accuratescore for each criterion. Supervisors should go intothe
evaluation process with some humility since they can’tpossibly know everything about an administrator’scomplex
world. Similarly, administrators should be open tofeedback from someone with an outside perspective– all revolving
around whether the school is producing learning gainsfor all students. Note that student achievement isnot explicitly
included in these rubrics, but clearly it’s directlylinked to school leadership. How student resultsfactor into evaluation
is for each district or governing board to decide.
6. Some supervisors sugar-coat criticism and giveinflated scores to keep the peace and avoid hurtingfeelings. This
does not help an administrator improve. The kindestthing a supervisor can do for an underperformingadministrator
is give candid, evidence-based feedback and robustfollow-up support. Honest scores for all the administratorsin a
district can be aggregated into a spreadsheet thatcan give an overview of leadership development needs.
2

Evaluation Timeline/Workflow
Month Activity/Actions
By September 30 Meet with the evaluator to review indicators previouslydiscussed
from prior cycle. Identify 1 -2 goals and enter into e-portfolio by
9.30.
September - April Supervisor conducts walkthroughs and provides feedback.
September - June Peer Review is completed.
By January 15 Principal completes mid-year reflection on goals in e-portfolio.
By June 30 Survey is conducted based on goals.
Goal Presentation, Summative, and Comments
July - September Principal meets with the evaluator to discuss overallrating and goal
setting for the following year that is tied to evaluation standards.
3

Professional Practice Rubrics:
I. Diagnosis and Planning
The principal Highly Effective Effective Improvement Does Not Meet
Necessary Standards
Recruits a strong leadership Recruits and develops a Enlists one or two like-minded Works solo with little or no
a. team and develops its skills leadership team with a balance colleagues to provide advice support from colleagues.
Team and commitment to a high of skills. and support.
level.
Involves stakeholders in a Carefully assesses the school’s Makes a quick assessment of Is unable to gather much
b. comprehensive diagnosis of strengths and areas for the school’s strengths and information on the school’s
Diagnosis the school’s strengths and development. weaknesses. strong and weak points.
weaknesses.
Challenges colleagues by Engages colleagues by Presents data without a vision Bemoans students’ low
c. presenting the gap between comparing students’ current or a vision without data. achievement and shows
Gap current student data and a achievement with rigorous fatalism about bringing about
vision for future success. expectations. significant change.
Widespread practices of the School based goals align Distributes the district Does not share or follow
d. district mission statement and with the District mission statement that few the district mission
Goals building goals are evident mission/vision goals. staff remember. statement.
throughout the school.
Gets strong staff commitment Builds staff support for Expresses confidence that Takes one year at a time and
e. on a bold, ambitious long establishing long term student achievement will does not provide an
Goal term student achievement measurable goals. improve each year through achievement target.
target that aligns with the hard work.
Setting
district mission and goals.
Collaboratively crafts a Gets input and writes a Writes a non-specific, non- Recycles the previous year’s
f. comprehensive, results- comprehensive, measurable accountable action plan. non-specific,non-accountable
Strategy oriented action plan with action plan for the current action plan.
annual goals. year.
Fosters a sense of urgency andBuilds support among Presents the annual plan to Doesn’t seek support for the
g. ownership among stakeholders for achieving stakeholders and asks them to annual plan, resulting inlack
Support stakeholders for achieving annual goals. support it. of awareness or ownership.
annual goals.
Masterfully encourages Effectively addresses Works on persuading resistant Is discouraged and
h. resistant staff members who resistance, low staff members with differing immobilized by staff
Enlisting fear change and/or harbor low expectations, and fear of perspectives to get on board resistance, fear of change, and
expectations. change. with the plan. low expectations.
Regularly tracks progress, Periodically measures Occasionally focuses on key Is too caught up in daily crises
i. gives and takes feedback, and progress, listens to feedback, data points and prods to focus on emerging data.
Revision continuously improves and revises the strategic plan. colleagues to improve.
performance.
4

II. Priority Management and Communication
The principal Highly Effective Effective Improvement NecessaryDoes Not Meet
Standards
Plans for the year, month, Plans for the year, month, Comes to work with a list of Hasa listin hisor herhead of
a. week, and day, relentlessly week, and day, keeping the tasks that need to be tasks to be accomplished each
Planning getting the highest-leverage highest-leverage activities accomplished that day but day, but often loses track.
activities done. front and center. there is no long-term
planning.
Successfully communicates Uses a variety of means (e.g., Has a limited communication Is not an effective
b. goals to all constituencies by face-to-face, newsletters, repertoire and some key communicator, and others are
Communication skillfully using a variety of websites) to communicate stakeholders are not aware of often left guessing about
channels. goals to others. school goals. policies and direction.
Frequently solicits feedback Regularly reaches out to staff, Occasionally asks staff, Rarely or never reaches out to
c. and help from staff, students, students, parents, and external students, parents, or external others for feedback or help.
Outreach parents, and external partners. partners for feedback. partners for feedback.
Has a comprehensivesystem Writes down important Writes things down but is Trusts his or her memory to
d. for capturing key information, information, remembers, swamped by events and retain important information,
Follow-Up remembering, prioritizing, and prioritizes, and almost always sometimes doesn’t follow up. but often forgets and fails to
following up. follows up. follow up.
Has staff buy-in on exactly Makes sure staff know what is Periodically reminds teachers Fails to or is constantly
e. what is expected for building expected for building policies/ of building reminding staff what they
Expectations policies/procedures/practices procedures/practices. policies/procedures/practices. should be doing in terms of
. policies/ procedures/practices.
Effectively delegates relevant Delegates appropriate tasks to Doesn't delegate enough tasks Does almost everything
f. tasks to ensure the leader is staff members and monitors that should be done by others. themselves.
Delegation able to focus on the highest progress.
priority goals.
Successfully gets all key Ensures that key teams (e.g., Needs to call key team Convenes grade-level,
g. teams meeting regularly and leadership, grade-level, meetings because they are not leadership, and other teams
Meetings taking responsibility for student support) meet in people’s calendars. only when there is a crisis or
productive agendas. regularly. an immediate need.
Takes the initiative so that Is effective at preventing Tries to prevent them, but Finds that large portions of
h. time-wasting activities and and/or deflecting many time- crises and time-wasters each day are consumed by
Prevention crises are almost always wasting activities and crises. sometimes eat up lots of time. crises and time-wasting
prevented or deflected. activities.
Deals quickly and decisively Has a system for dealing with Tries to stay on top of email, Is way behind on email,
with the highest-priority e- email, paperwork, and paperwork, and administrative paperwork, and administrative
i.
mail and paperwork. administrative chores. chores but is often behind. chores, to the detriment of the
Efficiency school's mission.
Is able to balance personal and Is able to balance personal and An imbalance of personal and Inability to balance priorities
professional priorities and is professional priorities and is professional priorities negatively affects ability to
j. able to interact in a highly able to effectively interact with sometimes hinders one’s interact with all stakeholders.
Balance effective manner with all all stakeholders. ability to effectively interact
stakeholders. with all stakeholders.
Perfect or near perfect Very good attendance which Moderate absences which may Many absences which may
k. attendance which provides the provides the opportunity to impact student learning. impact student learning.
Attendance opportunity to fully support fully support student learning. If there are extenuating If there are extenuating
and/or enhance student circumstances, state below. circumstances, state below.
learning.
5

III. Curriculum and Data
The principal Highly Effective Effective Improvement Does Not Meet
Necessary Standards
Ensures teachers are using Ensures teachers are using Refers teachers to district Leaves teachers without clear
district approved or national district approved or national approvedor national direction on student learning
a. scope-and-sequence documentsscope-and-sequence documentsscope-and-sequence outcomes for each grade level.
for curriculum direction with for curriculum direction.
Expectations documents for curriculum
exemplars.
direction.
Ensures that all teams use Provides teacher teams with Refers teachers to previous- Does not provide historical
summative data from the previous-year test data and year test data as a baseline for test data to teachers.
b. previous year and fresh ensures they assess students’ current-year instruction.
Baselines diagnostic data to plan current levels.
instruction.
Gets each grade-level/subject Works with grade-level and Urges grade-level/subject Urges teachers to improve
team invested in reaching subject-area teams to set teams to set measurable student achievement, but
c. measurable, results-oriented measurable student goals for student learning goals for the without measurable outcome
Targets year-end goals. the current year. current year. goals.
Ensures that all teachers have Gets teachers effective Works to procure good Leaves teachers to fend for
high-quality curriculum literacy, math, science, and curriculum materials in themselves with curriculum
d. materials, technology, and social studies materials and literacy and math. materials.
Materials training on how to use them. technology.
Ensures that high-quality, Ensures formative assessments Suggests that teachers give Doesn't insist formative
aligned, formative to monitor student learning are formative assessments to assessment be used.
e. assessments are given by all given several times a year. check on student learning.
Formative teachers on a regular basis.
Orchestrates high-quality Monitors teacher teams as Suggests that teacher teams Does not see the value of
data/action team meetings they analyze interim work together to draw lessons analyzing tests given during
f. after each round of assessment results and from the tests they give. the year.
Analysis assessments. formulate action plans.
Gets data meetings engaged in Ensuresthat data meetings Suggests that teachers focus on Does not exercise leadership
a no-blame, highly productive go beyondwhatstudents the areas in which students had in looking for underlying
g. search for root causes and got wrong and delve into the most difficulty. causes of student difficulties.
Causes hypothesis-testing. why.
Gets teams invested in Ensures teams follow up each Suggests that teachers use Does not provide time or
following up assessments with interim assessment with interim assessment datato leadership for follow-up after
h. effective re-teaching, tutoring, reteaching and remediation. help struggling students. tests.
Follow-Up and other interventions.
Uses data on grades, Monitors data in several key Monitors attendance and Is inattentive to important
attendance, behavior, and other areas and uses them to inform discipline data to inform school data.
i. variables to monitor and improvement efforts. decisions.
Monitoring drive continuous improvement
toward goals.
Boosts morale and a sense of Draws attention to student, Congratulates individuals on Takes credit for improvements
efficacy by getting colleagues classroom, and school-wide successes. in school performance or
j. to celebrate and own successes, giving credit where misses opportunities to
Celebration measurable student gains. credit is due. celebrate success.
6

IV. Supervision, Evaluation and Professional Development
The principal Highly Effective Effective Improvement Does Not Meet
Necessary Standards
In all-staff meetings, Uses staff meetings to get Uses staff meetings primarily Rarely convenes staff
gets teachers highly teachers sharing strategies and to announce decisions, clarify members and/or uses meetings
a. invested in discussing becoming more cohesive. policies, and listen to staff for one-way lectures on
Meetings results, learning best concerns. policies.
strategies, and building
trust and respect.
Ensures that the whole Reads and shares research and Occasionally passes along Rarely reads professional
b. staff is current on fosters an on-going, interesting articles and ideas literature or discusses best
Understanding professional literature and schoolwide discussion of best to colleagues. practices.
constantly exploring best practices.
of Best
practices.
Practices
Orchestrates aligned, Organizes aligned, on-going Provides staff development Provides occasional
high- quality coaching, coaching and training that workshops that rarely engage workshops, leaving teachers
c. mentoring, workshops, builds classroom proficiency. staff or improve instruction. mostly on their own in terms
Development school visits, and other of professional development.
professional learning
tuned to staff needs.
Gets teams to take Orchestrates regular teacher Suggests that teacher teams Does not emphasize teamwork
d. ownership for using data team meetings as the prime work together to address and teachers work mostly in
Empowerment and student work to drive focus for professional students' learning problems. isolation from colleagues.
constant refinement of learning.
teaching.
Gives teacher teams the Ensures that teacher teams Has teacher teams appoint an Leaves teacher teams to fend
e. training, facilitation, and have facilitators so meetings individual to chair meetings for themselves in terms of
Support resources they need to are focused and substantive. and file reports that may not leadership and direction.
make their meetings always be focused or
highly effective. substantive.
Ensures that teachers Asks teacher teams to Occasionally reviews teachers' Does not review lessons or unit
backwards-design high- cooperatively plan curriculum lesson plans but not unit plans. plans.
f. Units quality, aligned units and units built from district
provides feedback on learning objectives.
drafts.
Visits classrooms regularly Makes unannounced visits to a Tries to get into classrooms Only observes teachers in
g. and provides timely, few classrooms every day and but is often distracted by other annual or bi-annual formal
Evaluation actionable feedback. gives helpful feedback to events and rarely provides observation visits.
teachers. feedback.
Courageously engages Provides redirection and Provides feedback to Shies away from giving
in difficult conversations support to teachers who are struggling teachers but does honest feedback and
h. with below-proficient less than proficient. not give them much help redirection to teachers who are
Feedback teachers, helping them improving their performance. not performing well.
improve.
Provides high level Provides support and/or Provides some support or tries Does not initiate nonrenewal
support and/or dismisses dismisses most ineffective to nonrenewineffective procedures or provide
i. all ineffective teachers, teachers, following teachers, but is stymied by support, despite evidence that
Accountability scrupulously following contractual requirements. procedural errors. some teachers are ineffective.
contractual requirements.
7

Recruits, hires, and Recruits and hires effective Hires teachers who seem to fit Makes last-minute
j. supports highly effective teachers. his or her philosophy of appointments to teaching
Hiring teachers who share the teaching. vacancies based on candidates
school’s vision. who are available.
V. Discipline and Family Involvement
The principal Highly Effective Effective Improvement Does Not Meet
Necessary Standards
Gets staff buy-in for clear, Sets expectations for student Urges staff to demand good Often tolerates discipline
a. schoolwide student-behavior behavior and establishes student behavior, but allows violations and enforces the
Expectations standards, routines, and schoolwide routines and different standards in different rules inconsistently.
consequences. consequences. classrooms.
Deals effectively with any Deals quickly with disruptions Deals firmly with students Tries to deal withdisruptive
disruptions to teaching and to learning and looks for who are disruptive in students but is swamped by
b. learning, analyzes patterns, underlying causes. classrooms, but doesn’t get to the number of problems.
Effectiveness and works on prevention. the root causes.
Publicly celebrates kindness, Celebrates student Inconsistently celebrates Rarely celebrates students
effort, and improvement and achievement and core value student achievement and core and fails to build school
c. builds students’prideintheir behaviors and works to build value behaviors. pride.
Celebration school. school spirit.
Ensures that staff are skilled in Organizes workshops and Urges teachers to get better at Does little to build teachers'
proactive management and suggests articles and books on classroom management. skills in classroom
d. sensitive handling of student classroom management. management.
Training issues.
Is highly effective getting Identifies struggling students Tries to get crisis counseling Focuses mainly on discipline
counseling, mentoring, and and works to get support for highly disruptive and and punishment with highly
e. other supports for high-need services to meet their needs. troubled students. disruptive and troubled
Support students. students.
Makes families feel welcome Makes parents feel welcome, Responds to parents only Makes little effort to reach out
and respected, responds to listens to their concerns, and when concerns are raised. to families and is defensive
f. concerns, and gets a number tries to get them involved. when parents express
Openness of them actively involved in concerns.
the school.
Ensures that families receive Ensures that information about Information about grade-level Information about grade level
regular information about grade-level learning learning expectations and expectations is not available or
g. learning expectations and expectations and about ways about ways families can help not referenced.
specific ways that families can
Curriculum families can help at home is at home is available to
support student learning.
provided to families. families but rarely
referenced.
Orchestrates productive Works to maximize the Some effort to set up Minimal effort to set up
parent/teacher conferences in number of face-to-face parent/ face-to-face parent/teacher face-to-face parent/ teacher
h. which parents and students teacher conferences. conferences to occur. conferences to occur.
Conferences get specific suggestions on
next steps.
8

Sends home frequent school Sends home periodic school Suggests that teachers Leaves parent contact and
communications and has all communication and asks communicate regularly with communication up to
i. teachers sending substantive teachers to have regular parents. individual teachers.
Communication updates. channels of communication of
their own.
Provides effective Provides interventions for most Provides ad hoc, occasional Does not provide assistance
j. interventions for all students. students. support for students. for students.
Safety-net
VI. Management and External Relations
The principal Highly Effective Effective Improvement Does Not Meet
Necessary Standards
Consistently is up-to-date on Identifies effective research Explores research based Plays it safe and sticks with
a. research based strategies that based strategies to improve strategies that might improve the status quo.
Strategies boost student learning. student learning. achievement.
Creates an equitable schedule Creates a schedule that provides Creates a schedule with some Creates a schedule with
that maximizes learning, meeting times for all key teams. technical flaws and few inequities, technical flaws, and
b. teacher collaboration, and opportunities for team little time for teacher teams to
Scheduling smooth transitions. meetings. meet.
Ensures efficient, friendly Ensures orderly student entry, Ensures student entry, There are frequent problems
student entry, dismissal, meal dismissal, meals, class dismissal, transitions, and with student entry, dismissal,
c. times, transitions, and recessestransitions, and recesses. meal times. or common spaces.
Movement every day.
Collaborates with the DirectorCollaborates with the Director Works with custodial staff to Leaves campus cleanliness
of Facilities in leading staff to of Facilities in supervising keep the campus clean and and safety to custodial staff
d. ensure effective, creative use staff to keep the campus clean, safe, but there are occasional and there are frequent lapses.
Custodians of space and a clean, safe, andattractive, and safe. lapses.
inviting campus.
Is transparent about how and Ensures that staff members Tries to be transparent about Makes decisions with little or
why decisions were made, know how and why key decision-making, but no consultation, causing
e. involving stakeholders decisions are being made. stakeholders sometimes feel frequent resentment and
Transparency whenever possible. shut out. morale problems.
Deftly handles bureaucratic, Manages bureaucratic, Sometimes allows bureaucratic,Frequently mishandles
contractual, and legal issues contractual, and legal issues contractual, and legal issues to bureaucratic, contractual, and
f. so they never detract from, efficiently and effectively. distract teachers from their legal issues in ways that
Bureaucracy and sometimes contribute to, work. disrupt teaching and learning.
teaching and learning.
Skillfully manages the budget Manages the school’s budget Manages budget and finances Makes errors in managing the
and finances to maximize and finances to support the with few errors, but misses budget and finances and
g. student achievement and staff strategic plan. opportunities to support the misses opportunities to further
Budget growth. strategic plan. the mission.
9

Fulfills all compliance and Fulfills compliance and Meets minimum compliance Has difficulty keeping the
reporting requirements and reporting responsibilities to and reporting responsibilities school in compliance and
h. creates opportunities to the district and beyond. with occasional lapses. district and other external
Compliance support staff compliance requirements.
and training.
Builds strong relationships Builds relationships with districtIs professional with district Neglects relationship-building
with key district and external and external staffers to enlist and external staff but does not with district and external staff
i. personnel, and motivates their active support. enlist their active support. and doesn't have their support
Relationships them to contribute to the to get things done.
school’s mission.
Taps all possible human and Is effective in bringing Occasionally raises additional Is resigned to working with the
financial resources to support additional human and financial funds or finds volunteers to standard school budget, which
j. the school’s mission and resources into the school. help out. doesn’t seem adequate.
Resources strategic plan.
Actively seeks out Listens thoughtfully to Inconsistently heeds Dismisses feedback
feedback, gathers other viewpoints, gathers feedback of and suggestions for
documentation and documentation, and stakeholders. improvement.
k.
suggestions from key responds constructively
Feedback
stakeholders and uses to suggestions and
them to improve criticism.
performance.
10

Self-Reflection/Assessment
Each fall, in conjunction with the superintendent,the principal will identify 1 or 2 indicators asan area of focus
for goal setting. At the end of the year, the principal will reflect on the successes and challenges of meetingthe
goals. Possible points of emphasis are action plans,professional development, work with teachers, students,
parents or community members, use of data, surveys,data you are proud of, results of the action planand why.
Peer Review
During the year, the principal accesses formativefeedback through a self-selected peer review. Peer feedback is
for professional growth purposes only and is not calculated into the summative effectiveness rating. A brief
reflection will be included in each principal’s e-portfolio.
Surveys
● The focus of the survey will be on meaningful goalsthat are individualized and targeted to a specific
goal or target group.
● The evaluator and the principal will decide togetherwhat data to collect and from whom and in what
manner.
● The evaluation of a principal is the responsibility of the superintendent and is part of a confidential
personnel file. Board Policy: GCOC
11

Summative Evaluation Worksheet Page
Name:_____________________________ School Year : __________________________________
Evaluator: _________________________ Position/School:________________________________
RATINGS ON INDIVIDUAL RUBRICS:
A. Diagnosis and Planning:
Highly Effective Effective ImprovementNecessary Does Not Meet Standards
B. Priority Management and Communication:
Highly Effective Effective ImprovementNecessary Does Not Meet Standards
C. Curriculum and Data:
Highly Effective Effective ImprovementNecessary Does Not Meet Standards
D. Supervision, Evaluation, and Professional Development:
Highly Effective Effective ImprovementNecessary Does Not Meet Standards
E. Discipline and Parent Involvement:
Highly Effective Effective ImprovementNecessary Does Not Meet Standards
F. Management and External Relations:
Highly Effective Effective ImprovementNecessary Does Not Meet Standards
Professional Practice Overall Rating
Highly Effective (4) Effective (3) ImprovementNecessary (2) Does Not Meet Standards (1)
Professional practice overall rating: __________
Student Growth Discussion:
Evaluator comments:
Administrator comments:
Supervisor’s signature: Date: __________________________
Administrator’s signature: Date: ______________________
(The administrator’s signature indicates that he orshe has seen and discussed the evaluation; it does not
necessarily denote agreement with the report.)
12