SOURCE: https://rsu5org.finalsite.com/fs/resource-manager/view/5a1010ed-7300-4812-8cb4-268059085bea
SECTION: /quick-links/district-news
TITLE: January 2025
TYPE: Finalsite-PDF
============================================================

RSU5 JANUARY 2025
Superintendent’s Community Newsletter
To inspire and support every learner by challenging minds, building character,
sparking creativity, and nurturing passions.
Strategic Planning Process Update
Jean Skorapa, Superintendent
The process of upda.ng RSU5's strategic plan will begin with the development of a Portrait of a
Graduate. A Portrait of a Graduate is a vision of the skills and characteris.cs our community wants all of
our schools' graduates to possess. By iden.fying these skills and characteris.cs we can help students to
develop them while they are in school and beDer prepare them for success and lifelong learning.
The strategic plan will ar.culate our plan for making our vision a reality over the next five years. As part
of this process, we will be hos.ng mul.ple community conversa.ons throughout the district during the
spring. Your voice will be essen.al! In the next few weeks, we will be sending out informa.on about
how to par.cipate in spring community conversa.ons. We hope you will join us to share your thoughts
about priori.es and opportuni.es!
Overview of RSU 5’s Portrait of a Graduate and Strategic Plan Process
Laying the Seeking Drafting Strategic
Foundation Community Input the Portrait Planning
January 2025 - March 2025 - June 2025 - October 2025-
February 2025 May 2025 September 2025 May 2026
Identify critical stakeholders to Gather data from Draft and finalize RSU 5’s Draft and finalize RSU 5's
support this work. Develop community using focus Portrait of a Graduate. strategic plan informed by
timeline and goals with groups and surveys. the Portrait of a Graduate.
Strategic Planning Committee.

RSU5
Instructional Support Updates
Elisha Morris, Director of Instructional Support
Serving Students with a Variety of Needs
In RSU 5, instruc.onal support services are designed to meet the diverse needs of students with
disabili.es, ensuring that each child receives the support they need to succeed academically and
socially. Currently, 336 students, or 18% of the district’s student popula.on, have Individualized
Educa.on Programs (IEPs). These students may qualify for special educa.on services based on a
variety of classifica.ons, including specific learning disability, speech or language impairment, au.sm
spectrum disorder, emo.onal disability, intellectual disability, other health impairment, hard of
hearing, deafness, visual impairment (including blindness), orthopedic impairment, deaf-blindness,
trauma.c brain injury, or mul.ple disabili.es.
It's important to note that having a disability does not automa.cally mean a student requires an IEP;
eligibility is determined through a comprehensive evalua.on process. Services are tailored to
individual needs and may include push-in support (where special educa.on staff work alongside
students in general educa.on classrooms), pull-out services (in a resource room for more focused
instruc.on), as well as consulta.on services for teachers.
The district offers specialized programs like Func.onal Life Skills (FLS) and behavioral programming. To
provide well-rounded support, RSU 5 employs a team of professionals, including speech pathologists,
occupa.onal therapists (OTs), physical therapists (PTs), school psychologists, and a Board Cer.fied
Behavior Analyst (BCBA). These professionals work together to ensure that every student has access to
the services they need to thrive in their educa.onal journey.
Addi.onally, instruc.onal support services in RSU 5 meet the needs of Mul.lingual Learners and
students with 504 plans, ensuring equity and access to a meaningful educa.on for all students. The
Office of Instruc.onal Support also oversees services related to homelessness through the McKinney-
Vento Liaison and provides support for students in foster care through the Foster Care Liaison.
For more informa.on contact Elisha Morris, Director of Instruc.onal Support at 207-865-0928x227 or
morrise@rsu5.org

RSU5
Happenings Around the Schools
Morse Street School - Julie Nickerson, Principal
Morse Street School has been bustling with family-school engagement over the last few months! As a part of
our school goals we are increasing opportuni.es for families to feel
connected to their child’s learning and school as a resource as well as a
community where they feel like they belong.
From PK to 2nd grade, families have been invited to par.cipate in
different parts of their student’s day such as Math Ajernoon, Wri.ng
Celebra.ons, Play Workshop, and guest readers. In addi.on, families have
been invited to aDend a special: STEM, art, music, PE, or library. Our Care
Team (nurse, social work, school counselor) has offered two opportuni.es
for “Coffee and Conversa.on” on topics that our families iden.fied as an
area they would like to discuss
and learn more about. These
experiences have offered a level
of transparency and collabora.on that has enhanced our community
of learners.
By nurturing this partnership, Morse Street creates a more inclusive
atmosphere that values the contribu.ons of families, ul.mately
leading to the holis.c development of students, a posi.ve school
culture, and student success.
Mast Landing School - Emily Grimm, Principal
Last year at Mast Landing School, we launched the Daily Mile, a 15-minute block each morning when the
whole school community walk or run a ¼ mile
loop around the building. This addi.on to the
schedule promotes wellness through
movement, cul.vates community as students
and staff connect, and supports effec.ve
learning through the movement break between
academic blocks. Students and staff have
quickly come to appreciate this .me as an
essen.al part of the school day through the
myriad benefits to well-being.

RSU5
One of our newest extracurriculars at MLS, Gaming Club, con.nues to
grow in interest among students. Currently, 60 MLS 4th and 5th
graders alongside FMS student leaders engage in the collabora.ve
game play of Dungeons and Dragons for three hours on Friday
ajernoons. In addi.on to suppor.ng social skill building, this highly
engaging club has been a way for students to strengthen connec.ons
to one another and the school.
Pownal Elementary School - Holly Johnson, Principal
Did you know Pownal Elementary has a Science Museum? Scien.sts
in grades K-5 have curated the ever changing collec.on of science
specimens found either at home or at school. It has become a
growing display that lets students share their new discoveries!
Each school break, students Prek-5 are invited to par.cipate in our
Monster Reading Challenges. December’s Reading Monsters took on
a winter like theme and readers logged over 18,000 minutes of
reading as they enjoyed great books at home!
On Thursday, April 10th Pownal will
host our Whole School Study Share
Night 6:00-6:30. This year’s focus of
learning is Outer Space! The share will
be followed by our Fourth and Fijh
Grade performance of Vaca.on On
Mars.
Durham Community School - Will Pidden, Principal
It has been a strong start to 2025 at Durham Community School! Prior to
winter break, our 5th- 8th grade band and chorus students showcased their
talent at their first concert of the year. A special highlight was the
enthusias.c par.cipa.on of our 5th graders, many of whom were
performing in their first-ever band concert!
Recently, we welcomed the Portland Stage Company, whose engaging
workshops for our Pre-K through 4th-grade students brought storytelling and
crea.ve expression to life in our classrooms.
Our 8th graders have been diligently preparing their Na.onal History Day projects, diving deep into this year’s
theme, "Rights and Responsibili.es." These projects challenge students to explore historical events and figures
through the lens of civic duty and personal freedoms. The culmina.on of their research and crea.vity will be
showcased in presenta.ons this February, and we are eager to see the results of their hard work.
Looking ahead, we are excited for the opportuni.es the spring will bring, including the 8th-grade trip to the
Schoodic Ins.tute and the 4th-grade trip to Boston. These experiences promise to enrich our students’
learning and create las.ng memories.

RSU5
Freeport Middle School - Amy St.Pierre, Principal
Exci.ng things are happening at Freeport Middle School!
The FMS Drama Club is gearing up to present their performance of The Enchanted Bookshop on Friday, January
31st at 7:00 PM and Saturday, February 1st at 2:00 PM at the FPAC. Don’t miss this fantas.c show!
In 8th grade, students are busy working on their Na.onal History Day projects and
presenta.ons, collabora.ng with students from Durham Community School. The
Na.onal History Day presenta.ons will take place on February 11th from 6:30 to
7:30 PM here at FMS. We hope to see you there to support our talented students!
We’re also looking forward to our annual Winter Fab Friday on Friday, February 7th.
Fab Friday is a special school day where students have the chance to choose from a
variety of exci.ng ac.vi.es designed by our staff. This year’s offerings include
everything from winter outdoor adventures to crea.ve experiences inside the
building.
Finally, we’ve been building school spirit with Pep Rallies! Staff and students have
been compe.ng in fun ac.vi.es to win the coveted Spirit S.ck. It’s been a wonderful
way to strengthen our sense of community and enthusiasm.
Freeport High School - Jen Gulko, Principal
Nine students par.cipa.ng in Mock Trial competed on two Saturdays in
November at the York County Courthouse. The first week they won their
case on Defense against Cape Elizabeth High School, but were not so
successful as the Prosecu.on against Casco Bay High School. Ajer a hard
week of strategizing, rewri.ng ques.ons, and improving their objec.ons,
the Falcon Mock Trial team won both of our cases on November 23rd, as
Defense against Cheverus and Prosecu.on against Edward LiDle High
School. All students improved their performances and lej the compe..on
feeling good!
Students in Jill Hyland’s mul.lingual program worked with local, Evan Haynes, who spearheaded Our Town, A
Community Self-Portrait project. Students walked all over Freeport taking photos and wri.ng in small journals
about what Freeport means to them. Mee.nghouse Arts and Freeport Historical Society had these on exhibit.
They will be on display at the Freeport Community Library in the future.

RSU5
Budget Development is Underway
At the January 22, 2025 Board mee.ng, the proposed budget for 2025-2026 was presented. The proposed
budget will allow us to con.nue to provide a high quality educa.on and move our district forward, while at
the same .me being fiscally responsible to the taxpayer. There will be several opportuni.es in the upcoming
months for the public to provide feedback regarding the FY26 budget. Visit the RSU5 website at
www.rsu5.org/budget/budget-2025-2026 for budget documents.