SOURCE: https://www.rsu5.org/fs/resource-manager/view/9fd19e8b-609d-46ae-b9b3-ec5289448aaa
SECTION: /quick-links/early-childhood-planning-cds
TITLE: November 12, 2025 Presentation
TYPE: Finalsite-PDF
============================================================

RSU 5 Early Childhood
Special Education
Early Childhood Education Task Force – Meeting #2



We have been talking about…
● Reiterate mandate to serve children ages 3–5 by July 2028
● Clarify today’s objective: move from information to initial model
exploration

Recap and restate: Part W AND THE OPTIONS
Fully engaged starting July 1, 2028 (which will need some leg work in starting
January 2028 even without opting into Cohort 4)
We are speaking specifically designated student population within the confines of
Child Find Policy and Special Ed Law
Options along the way include financial and technical support from state.
- 2026 - 2027 4 yo only or 3-4 yr only
- 2027 - 2028 3 - 4 yo only option

RSU 5’s First Major Decision…
4. Focused Scope: What We Are and Are Not Deciding Tonight (6:00–6:10)
● Tonight's focus is Cohort 3 (four-year-olds) for the 2026–2027 school year
● Explicitly remove full-day programming questions from the discussion
● Do not include three-year-olds or Child Find evaluation costs in this phase

Cohort 3
We would commit to providing Child Find and FAPE to all 4 year old children living
within RSU 5 district limits. In return, we would receive the financial and technical.

WHY WOULD WE DO THAT…

Cohort 3 4 yo only: Risk - Reward
- Access to time-limited funding - FAPE and Due Process
- Access to time-limited technical support - Some things can start without taking on
- Access to flexibility in managing quarterly official responsibility: Community Letters
allocation needs from Office of Instructional Support for
- Cushion for mistakes and needs to example. Joining C-B meetings.
revamp - A 4 year old students only decision carries
- Funds to make key hires, build out a smaller child count with nearly half
systems, and develop policy and already receiving per student. Those
procedures students would only see an 1.5% rise.
- Only year left to do 4 year old students require less intensive services and less
only financial support.$ is based on childcount
- Momentum of those serving. - does the allocation
- No 3yo nor Child Find responsibilities cover what is needed to provide the
- Paid to build out lasting systems: some services?
before they are required

Like minds around the field…
Wisdom from the field: Why others have committed Districts who have joined Cohort 3:
RSU 14, Sanford, RSU 6, Portland, Lewiston?,
Assistant Superintendent Windham- Raymond Christine Frost-Bertinet Bangor?, Biddeford
RSU 6 SPED Director Katie Hawes-
We decided to join Cohort 3 because we want to bring on services for 4 years olds first
and then 3 years olds the following year and were told that this was the last cohort
with that option. Additionally, it seems this may be the last cohort that will get fully
furnished classrooms.
Assistant Superintendent Sanford Steve Bussiere

What we do and what we will do…

Cohort 3 What do for 4 yos now and in 2026 - 2027
We will extend the EIT teams scope by offering the direct service to 4 yo old
students in out of school places
- Child Find and referral - already
- We have not discussed providing whole class, small group, and individual
student
- EIT team contracts on a per student basis to provide direct service i to
enrolled w 4yo students with active IEPs within community schools

Cohort 3 What we will do for 4 yos in 2026 -2027
Existing team is designed to meet Child Find, referral, MTSS needs, and direct service needs.
- No changes to EIT scope
- Additional hires: 1 Speech, 1 OT, 1 282B, ECSE, ECSE office support
- Engage in Child Find… screening offered to all distinct children and referrals to CDS
- We have not discussed MTSS work in settings outside of RSU 5 schools. (Pyramid?)
- EIT will provide, or RSU 5 will contract for, child find/ eligibility evaluations
- EIT will provide, directly or contracting an entity to, direct service to all 4yo students with
active IEPs living within RSU 5 district limits

How we would do that…
6. Exploring Service Models for Four-Year-Olds (6:25–7:00)
With our current Early Intervention Team (EIT) as the starting point.
Small-group discussion of scenarios:
● Maintain current scope (EIT continues serving enrolled students only, with wraparound model)
● Shift scope to include unenrolled four-year-olds
● Other hybrid approaches that use existing staff efficiently

Gaps in current service and Models…
- Speech, OT, 282b capacity to serve 4 year olds not attending schools
- Evaluation of students referred for special education services
Models to address the need to extend current services …
- Bring 4 year old students to community schools
- Provide services in community settings (Itinerant model)
- Provide a mix of both school based and itinerant services

Benefits and challenges of building based efforts
Benefits: Challenges:
Centralized locations spaces

Benefits and challenges of itinerant efforts
Benefits- Challenges-
Space and teacher - student ratio Travel time
Child is seen in a familiar setting Providing 9 hours of gen ed? (maybe?)

Benefits and challenges applied to a mixed delivery model
Benefits: Challenges:
Optimize space Scheduling complexity
Flexibility in scheduling

Key Factors: in financing a plan
5. Budget and Funding Context (6:10–6:25)
● How allocation funding works
● Connection between child count and state funding
● Clarify that increased Child Count increases funding
● Review projected enrollment numbers for four-year-olds (enrolled and unenrolled)

Calculate child count based on historical info and base locations on area childcare
facilities if outside of schools
Decide on a model
Decide on resources needed for the model
Build a budget
Make an estimate for allocation
Adjust budget
Enter into an MOU or … not this year.

Yearly allocation
- Allocation is based on child count A conservative illustration using 20
- Paid quarterly
ECSE 4yr old count: 20
- Count X per student X 1.5% or more
- Increases as student numbers increase;
20 4yo x Per student X 1.5%
decrease if student number drops (very
unlikely) Annual allocation:
- Only covers resources committed to ECSE
students
- Early allocation in April (if not before)

Child count
Defined: More data to estimate child count:
- Required for all SAUs Historical student number data for 4 yo enrolled
- Submitted Quarterly: 10/1, in RSU 5 schools. (Julie- sheet)
- Only ECSE students serving through
Student numbers change from year to year and
cohort are in the allocation count
increase as the academic year moves along
- ECSE count as 11/1
Using the estimated child count for 2026-2027 to
design a reasonable budget to submit for
funding…

More Allocation considerations
- The current budget serves a portion of ECSE students. For example, serving
12 enrolled students only increases funding by 1.5% (at a minimum) per
student. Serving 15 unenrolled students increases funding inclusive of per
student and 1.5%.
- Financing a plan should consider the “real feel”of the allocation when
calculating a reasonable budget.
- It has been paid reliably and timely according to current cohort districts
- It can be helpful look at what others have used allocations for - linked
example list from codified budget

Building Based one time funding and grants
First come, first serve to districts in the order they commit to Cohort
Based on pre requisite walk through from CDS
Here is an example of resources allocated to SAUs: link inventory sheet
Grants for infrastructure/ physical plant work are available while they last. This
work is outside of the cohort funding process.
Requisitions for vans are available- also outside of cohort funding process

Background Knowledge
3. Understanding Special Education Processes (5:40–6:00)
Goal: Establish a shared understanding of key terminology and processes.
● Overview of essential special education terms
○ Child Find
○ Referral/evaluation
○ IEP qualification and service provision
● Distinguish clearly between:
○ Child Find/referral (responsibility to identify)
○ IEP qualification and delivery of services (responsibility to educate)

Child Find first, then Qualification for IEP
Child Find- IEP
Special Education services are offered in a legally binding process
- District already responsible for k-12
- Based on a referral process (Child find)
- Extend RSU 5 Child FInd to 3-5
- Referred for eval
- Referrals for evaluation can be made by - Eval indicated and completed
- Receive a diagnosis of a qualifying disability
parents, providers, educators - Demonstrates challenges directly linked to disability
- CDS received referrals
- Efforts for child find include
The majority of COHORT 3 work would be with already identified
students and the referral process for 4 yo students only. Child Find
would extend to move-in and unidentified 4 year old students.
Refer for eval vs part c-b and community child find efforts.

Background Knowledge: the scope of this decision is about ECSE
Special Education is a service not a location Special Educations services are offered along a
continuum
- Can be provided in community settings
homes, schools - Least to most
- Special purpose refers to settings in which
Special Education services are offered in a
all students who are placed require full day
legally binding process
program separate, specialized classroom
setting from that of typical peers
- Based on a referral process
- 50/50 and transitional classrooms are not
- Referred to for eval
special purpose classrooms.
- Receive a diagnosis
- Demonstrates academic, functional,
developemental challenges directly linked
to diagnosis